View metadata, citation and similar papers at core.ac.uk

brought to you by

CORE

provided by UNT Digital Library

This document was prepared in conjunction with work accomplished under Contract No. DE-AC09-96SR18500
with the U. S. Department of Energy.
DISCLAIMER
This report was prepared as an account of work sponsored by an agency of the United States Government. Neither the
United States Government nor any agency thereof, nor any of their employees, nor any of their contractors,
subcontractors or their employees, makes any warranty, express or implied, or assumes any legal liability or
responsibility for the accuracy, completeness, or any third party's use or the results of such use of any information,
apparatus, product, or process disclosed, or represents that its use would not infringe privately owned rights. Reference
herein to any specific commercial product, process, or service by trade name, trademark, manufacturer, or otherwise,
does not necessarily constitute or imply its endorsement, recommendation, or favoring by the United States Government
or any agency thereof or its contractors or subcontractors. The views and opinions of authors expressed herein do not
necessarily state or reflect those of the United States Government or any agency thereof.

Integration of Predicted Atmospheric Contaminant Plumes into ArcView GIS

Larry D. Koffman
Savannah River National Laboratory, Building 773-42A, Aiken, SC 29808, larry.koffman@srnl.doe.gov
Abstract – The Savannah River National Laboratory (SRNL) plays a key role in emergency response scenarios in which
there may be a release of atmospheric chemical or radiological contamination at the DOE’s Savannah River Site (SRS).
Meteorologists at SRNL use a variety of tools to predict the path of the plume and levels of contamination along the path.
These predictions are used to guide field teams that take sample measurements for verification. Integration of these
predicted plumes as well as field measurements into existing Geographic Information System (GIS) interactive maps provides
key additional information for decision makers during an emergency. In addition, having this information in GIS format
facilitates sharing the information with other agencies that use GIS.
In order to be useful during an emergency, an application for converting predictions or measurements into GIS format
must be automated and simple to use. Thus, a key design goal in developing such applications is ease of use. Simple menu
selections and intuitive forms with graphical user interfaces are used to accomplish this goal.
Applications have been written to convert two different predictive code results into ArcView GIS. Meteorologists at
SRNL use the Puff/Plume code, which is tied to real-time wind data, to predict the direction and spread of the atmospheric
plume for early assessment. The calculated circular puffs are converted into an ArcView polygon shapefile with attributes
for predicted time, dose, and radius of the puff.
The meteorologists use the more sophisticated Lagrangian Particle Dispersion Model (LPDM) to predict particle
dispersion and deposition. The calculational grid is brought into ArcView as a point shapefile and then interpolated to ARC
GRID format using Spatial Analyst. This GRID can then be contoured into a line shapefile, which is easily shared with other
agencies. The deposition grid is also automatically contoured for values that correspond to FDA Derived Intervention
Levels for beef, produce, and dairy products.
Decision makers at SRS routinely use these predicted plumes to direct field teams. In the case of a strong release, this
information can be used to decide whether to evacuate a particular area. Having this information in GIS format may aid the
decision maker because other infrastructure information can be overlaid with geographic reference.

I. INTRODUCTION
The DOE’s Savannah River Site, located southeast of
Augusta, Georgia, produced nuclear materials from the
1950’s to the 1990’s and continues to handle a variety of
hazardous materials, both chemical and radioactive.
Consequently, emergency response to a potential
atmospheric release of chemical or radioactive material
has long been an issue of both operational readiness and
research and development. For many years, the
Atmospheric Technologies Group (ATG) at Savannah
River National Laboratory (SRNL) has developed and
maintained state-of-the-art measurement and predictive
capabilities. These capabilities have culminated in the
Weather Information and Display (WIND) System, which
is a computer-based resource for predicting the
consequences of an accidental release of hazardous
material. The WIND System integrates measurements
and predictive capabilities into a single, automated
process. Local measurements are continuously collected
from a network of monitoring sites, and various other

regional atmospheric information feeds and forecasts are
collected, including local Doppler radar. ATG has
developed an operational configuration of the Regional
Atmospheric Modeling System (RAMS) to produce near
real-time predictions of complex three-dimensional
atmospheric motion, generating detailed eight-hour
forecasts every three hours. The measurements and
operational RAMS predictions are integrated in the
WIND System to be used by a suite of environmental
transport models to support consequence assessments and
protective action decisions during all phases of
emergency response.
In the late 1990’s SRNL developed the first site-wide
ArcView GIS system at SRS that made typical GIS
infrastructure data available over the site computer
network. ATG was an early user of this GIS system and
through ATG this GIS system was introduced to and
adopted by the SRS Emergency Operations Center
(EOC). ATG realized that the overlay of various types of
data provided another useful tool for decision makers and

began a program to integrate their predictive plume
results into the ArcView GIS system.
In order to be useful during an emergency, an
application for converting predictions or measurements
into GIS format must be automated and simple to use.
Thus, a key design goal in developing such applications is
ease of use. Simple menu selections and intuitive forms
with graphical user interfaces are used to accomplish the
goal of ease of use. The automation is accomplished by
developing a “handshake” with the predictive model in
the WIND system so that output from the predictive
model can be automatically converted into GIS format.

UTM coordinates before the pathline and puff polygons
are created.
The ease of use of the application is shown by the
form in Figure 1. All that is required is for the user to
browse to locate the text file written by Puff/Plume and
then specify the location and basename of the shapefile.
Buttons with preset directories for input and output
quickly guide the user to the default locations. When the
Convert button is clicked, the application processes the
text file information into the shapefiles previously
described.

II. CONVERSION OF PUFF/PLUME RESULTS
Within the suite of predictive models in the WIND
System, the Puff/Plume code is used for early assessment
in an emergency. Puff/Plume is a highly flexible
trajectory Gaussian model that provides an initial,
reasonably conservative estimate of downwind
concentration or dose. Release trajectories are
constructed for up to 12 hours based on observed and/or
forecast winds. Puff/Plume is easy to run and runs
quickly, typically taking less than a minute to compute.
Puff/Plume is a PC Windows application with a graphical
user interface (GUI) for user choices. Puff/Plume
contains its own graphical output in which the computed
plume is overlaid on a static basemap, with several
different choices of basemaps. One of the user options is
to export a text file for conversion to ArcView GIS
format.
An ArcView extension was written to process the
text file that is written by Puff/Plume. The “handshake”
between Puff/Plume and the ArcView conversion is
created by insuring that the text file has a consistent
format, which is as follows. Line 1 is a header line with
time and date of release, the time step between puffs, a
flag of 1 for radioisotope or 2 for chemical, and the name
of the radioisotope or chemical. Line 2 has the longitude
and latitude of the release location. Subsequent lines are
for each successive time step in the calculation and each
line has a flag for display of the puff (0=no, 1=yes), the
longitude and latitude of the puff center, the radius of the
puff, and the concentration or dose.
The ArcView extension reads this text information
and creates two shapefiles. One shapefile is a line
shapefile that shows the plume path by connecting the
puff center points. The second shapefile is a polygon
shapefile that shows the puff circles with the radius of
each puff as read from the text file at its time step. The
attributes of the puff shapefile include the time step
number, the date, the time, the dose or concentration, the
distance from the source along the path, the radius of the
puff circle, and a flag for display. Note that in the
conversion the lat/lon center coordinates are converted to

Fig. 1. Form for Conversion of Puff/Plume.
In addition to creating the shapefiles, the shapefiles
are automatically loaded into the view and classified
(color coded) to match the legend in the Puff/Plume
output interface. For radioisotopes, the dose is broken
into five ranges of decades including 0-1 mrem, 1-10
mrem, 10-100 mrem, 100-1000 mrem, and above 1 rem.
For chemicals, the concentration is classified into four
ranges that are predetermined according to the chemical.
A dictionary lookup is used to assign these ranges. The
dictionary is created from the ranges contained in the
Puff/Plume code and must be updated if the ranges in
Puff/Plume are changed. Figure 2 shows an example of a
chemical plume that has been converted into shapefiles
and added to a view (note that the GIS view would use
colors; grayscale is used here for publication).

Fig. 2. Example of Puff/Plume Conversion.

Note that having these predicted plume results in
shapefile format allows for easy sharing with other
agencies that use ArcView GIS. The legend classification
discussed above is shared by creating a legend file with
ArcView 3.x or by creating a layer file with ArcGIS.

a line shapefile of contours. This contour shapefile is
easily shared with other agencies and is convenient to use
in the GIS display. The GRID format is also useful for
display but is more difficult to share. The main menu for
the conversion is shown in Figure 3 and follows the
strategy just outlined.

III. CONVERSION OF LPDM RESULTS
For the case of radionuclide contamination, once the
early assessment has been established a highly refined
transport and dispersion analysis can be performed with
the Lagrangian Particle Dispersion Model (LPDM).
LPDM utilizes the three-dimensional winds and
turbulence fields generated by RAMS. LPDM is a threedimensional stochastic model that calculates particle
dispersion and deposition of radiological isotopes from
the three-dimensional flow field. Outputs include
transient instantaneous surface concentration, integrated
surface deposition, initial exposure dose, dose rate, and
total dose equivalent for 4-day, 1-year, and 2-year
exposure. LPDM has an input graphical user interface
written in IDL (Interactive Data Language) and also has
sophisticated graphical output capabilities.
As with Puff/Plume, the advantage of converting
LPDM output to GIS format is for easy overlay with other
information used in the GIS system. The conversion to
GIS format is not as straightforward since we are now
dealing with three-dimensional fields. However, for
consequence analysis the deposition at ground level is of
most importance, so that the two-dimensional results at
ground level can be converted to GIS format.
There is now significantly more information but the
“handshake” strategy is the same. That is, text files are
written from post-processing of the LPDM results and the
text files are in a standard format that is read by the
ArcView application. There are six text files written with
standard names and formats as follows.

Fig. 3. Menu for LPDM Conversion.
When the first menu option is chosen to Convert
LPDM to ArcView, another form appears that is similar
to the form in Figure 1. The main difference is that there
are now six input files and six output files. The
application is written so that the standard names for input
files are automatically populated when the user browses
to find the IDL_header file. Likewise, standard names for
the output files are automatically populated when the user
browses to an output directory location. The user
normally performs these two browse operations and then
clicks the convert button to perform the processing. The
processing performs the following steps.
1. The IDL_header cell location data is converted to a
point shapefile with the cell ID as an attribute for each
point.
2. This point shapefile is projected to UTM coordinates.
An example of cell locations is shown in Figure 4.

IDL_header
ddep1.xxxx
conc1.xxxx
dosei.dat

XY cell ID and lat/lon of cell location
Cell ID, integrated deposition (pCi/m2)
Cell ID, concentration (pCi/m3)
Cell ID, 50-year Dose Equivalent Initial
Exposure (Rem), Dose Rate (µRem/hr)
doseo.dat
Cell ID, 4-Day Total Dose Equivalent
(Rem), 1-yr TDE (Rem), 2-yr TDE
(Rem)
autotime-pc.dat Number and lat/lon location of sources
Note that the extension xxxx denotes a time and there
may be outputs at multiple times. Each time result would
be processed separately in the ArcView conversion.
The strategy for the LPDM conversion is to convert
the cell locations to a point shapefile with an output value
as an attribute, convert the point shapefile to GRID format
using Spatial Analyst with the value interpolated onto a
grid of specified cell size, and then contour the grid to get

Fig. 4. Example of LPDM Grid Cell Locations.

3. Each of the value files is converted to a DBF table, e.g.
dosei.dat is converted to dosei.dbf. In addition to the
value field, a field with the log of the value is added.
4. The point shapefile with cell locations is added to the
view and the value table is joined to the point shapefile
using the cell ID for joining.
5. The log of the value field is used to classify the value
over five decades starting from the maximum value.
Figure 5 shows an example of deposition values classified
over five decades. Note that cells with zero deposition
are not displayed (transparent).

Fig. 6. Example of Grid of Deposition Values.
While the grid is useful, it is not easily shared with
other agencies. The third menu option in Figure 3,
Contour LPDM Grid, can be used to automatically
generate a contour shapefile with five contours at the
same decade intervals as shown in the grid legend. The
contour shapefile is automatically added to the view and
classified with the same colors as the grid. Figure 7
shows an example of the contours of the grid in Figure 6.
Fig. 5. Example of LPDM Deposition Values.
6. Each of the value fields are automatically joined to a
point shapefile and classified into five decades so that all
data is available for viewing or further processing. Note
that in Figure 5 that Conc, Dose, and Tde4d have been
added to the view in addition to deposition.
At this point the user has the LPDM results converted
into point shapefiles and can proceed to grid the values of
interest. Usually deposition is of most interest and the
following steps will use deposition as the example. With
the deposition theme selected, the user chooses the second
menu option in Figure 3 to interpolate the values into
GRID format. The user is given an option to choose the
cell size for the interpolation, which is presented with a
default value of 1/16 of the cell spacing. Usually the user
takes the default and the grid is created. The grid is
automatically added to the view and classified into five
decades. Figure 6 shows the grid corresponding to the
point values in Figure 5.
The grid in Figure 6 is useful as a backdrop in the
GIS view and this is used in the WIND ArcView System.
One example of how this grid is used is to direct field
teams that are deployed to gather field measurements to
verify the predicted plume and deposition. This
information could also be used by decision makers to
determine if certain areas should be evacuated.

Fig. 7. Example of Contours of Deposition Values.
Figure 3 shows a fourth menu option, Compute
Threshold Contours. This option is used with the
deposition grid and produces contours for deposition
values that correspond to FDA Derived Intervention
Levels for beef, produce, and dairy products. A
dictionary lookup for the radionuclide automatically
provides the threshold levels and generates the contours.

A message tells what the threshold value is and whether it
is exceeded. If the value is exceeded, then the shapefile is
automatically added to the view.
IV. CONCLUSIONS
During an emergency, decision makers rely on
integrated information, and having spatial information in
a GIS system may be beneficial to the decision makers.
Complex calculations such as atmospheric plume
predictions can be integrated into the GIS system for
overlay with other information. Key design goals in
developing a conversion application are ease of use and
automation to minimize manual operations. Examples
have been given for the conversion of two atmospheric
plume computations used at Savannah River National
Laboratory. “Handshake” between the computational
code and ArcView is easily accomplished using text files
in a defined format. The Puff/Plume and LPDM
conversions to ArcView are routinely used at SRNL
during emergency response situations.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The author wishes to thank Robert Addis, the
manager of the Atmospheric Technologies Group at
SRNL, for his support and his encouragement of the
integration of GIS with ATG calculations used for
emergency response. The author has worked closely with
Charles Hunter, the WIND System Coordinator, who has
provided the technical direction for integration of GIS
with the WIND System. Gary Snyder maintains the
Puff/Plume code and worked with the author to develop
the handshake for Puff/Plume conversion. Robert
Buckley developed the LPDM capability at SRNL and
worked with the author to develop the handshake for
LPDM conversion.

