4/9/25, 2:15 PM

Copies Of Gulf War Chemical Log Found | The Seattle Times

Copies Of Gulf War Chemical Log Found
Oct 24, 1997

Robert Burns
AP

WASHINGTON - An eight-month Pentagon investigation has uncovered copies of a
portion of still-missing Army records that chronicle efforts to detect the use of Iraqi
chemical and biological agents during and after the Persian Gulf War.
The records figure prominently in efforts to determine whether American and allied
troops were exposed to potentially harmful levels of chemical or biological agents.
Some believe such exposure could be a cause of the respiratory, neurological and other
ailments reported by many Gulf War veterans.
The records could not be found, but investigators discovered what they believe are
copies of about 15 pages of entries from the originals.
The copies were found in a search of the personal belongings of an active-duty Army
officer who is now under criminal investigation for wrongfully holding classified
documents, the Defense Department inspector general's office said. The officer's name
was not given.
In a report released yesterday, the inspector general's office said it could find no
evidence of a conspiracy to destroy or conceal the still-missing documents, which are
maintained by a crisis-watch team posted to Saudi Arabia after Iraq invaded Kuwait.
The office report concludes the missing logs probably were destroyed in October 1994 or
later after the relocation of the U.S. Central Command office that held the logs. Also still
missing is a computer disk containing a copy of the logs.
The Pentagon has said since the Gulf War that it has no evidence U.S. troops were
exposed to harmful levels of chemical agents.
Those who believe U.S. and allied troops were exposed to potentially dangerous levels of
chemical or biological agents during the war have speculated the Pentagon destroyed
the missing documents on purpose.

https://archive.seattletimes.com/archive/19971024/2568181/copies-of-gulf-w ar-chemical-log-found

1/2

4/9/25, 2:15 PM

Copies Of Gulf War Chemical Log Found | The Seattle Times

The investigators used lie-detector examinations to evaluate the testimony of some
witnesses interviewed; none of the tests indicated deception.
The investigators found a 20-page document, titled "Log Extracts - Biological Defense,"
during a search of the unidentified Army officer's belongings.
The 20-page document contains 223 entries, mostly notes chronicling the work of
chemical- and biological-agent detection teams in Kuwait and Saudi Arabia during the
war and in Iraq and Kuwait after the war ended in February 1991.
Many of the newly discovered entries discuss what detection teams called false
indicators of biological agents present in the area.
For example, an entry on Feb. 24, the day U.S. and allied forces launched their ground
attack against Iraqi forces in Kuwait, cited a "false report of confirmed anthrax use."
Anthrax is a deadly biological-warfare agent that Iraq was known to possess.

https://archive.seattletimes.com/archive/19971024/2568181/copies-of-gulf-w ar-chemical-log-found

2/2

