The Unraveling of the Middle East

201

trauma surgical procedures from the moment the fighting began. By 1986, two surgical airborne squads had been trained: the 274th Medical Detachment (Airborne) from
Fort Bragg and the 250th Medical Detachment Surgical (Airborne) at Fort Lewis. In
1989, personnel from these units parachuted into Panama as part of Operation Just
Cause. Unfortunately, the surgical teams could not set up their operating rooms until
their operating tables, anesthesia machines, and other heavy equipment arrived by air
transport (Stinger and Rush, 2006, p. 269). Nevertheless, the Army’s assessment of
FSTs was “exceptionally positive,” with an after-action recommendation that the Army
reexamine “conventional military medical doctrine to evaluate the costs and benefits
of the decreased logistical requirements of far-forward surgical resuscitation and immediate far-back evacuation” (Marble, 2014, p. 33). That reexamination was ongoing in
August 1990 when Saddam Hussein’s Iraqi Republican Guard invaded Kuwait.
In response to the IG and GAO assessments of operations Desert Shield and
Desert Storm, the Army’s Surgeon General initiated a medical reengineering program
in early 1993. Then, in March 1995, DoD published Medical Readiness Strategic Plan
1995–2001 (Joseph, 1995) to serve as an overall road map for attaining and sustaining
military medical readiness promising that things would be different the next time the
Army deployed (see Chapter Seven).
Gulf War Illness
In early 1992, members of an Indiana Army National Guard unit that had deployed
to the Persian Gulf reported suffering from fatigue, muscle and joint pain, memory
loss, and severe headaches,24 blaming their symptoms on exposure to a toxic environment during their deployment.25 In response, the VA established a health registry
where veterans could report their symptoms. The DoD then conducted an epidemiologic study, and a number of government panels were formed to examine the claims
24

The IOM provided a more complete list:
An undiagnosed illness, which may be associated with the following chronic symptoms: fatigue; symptoms
involving skin, headache, muscle pain, joint pain, neurological symptoms, neuropsychological symptoms;
symptoms involving the respiratory system, sleep disturbances, gastrointestinal symptoms, cardiovascular
symptoms, abnormal weight loss, or menstrual symptoms. Also included are the following medically unexplained chronic multi-symptom illnesses that are defined by a cluster of signs or symptoms: Chronic Fatigue
Syndrome, Fibromyalgia, and Irritable Bowel Syndrome. (Samet and Bodurow, 2008, p. 44)

25

The VA’s Research Advisory Committee on Gulf War Veterans’ Illnesses notes:
In addition to the many physical and psychological challenges common to other wartime deployments, military personnel who served in the 1990–1991 Gulf War were exposed to a long list of potentially hazardous
substances. Many possible “causes” of Gulf War illness have been suggested and even promoted in different
quarters since the war. Understanding the causes of Gulf War illness has been particularly challenging because
of the lack of hard data on individual exposures in theater. (Research Advisory Committee on Gulf War Veterans’ Illnesses, 2008, p. 6)

202

Providing for the Casualties of War: The American Experience Since World War II

(see Figure 6.5). While none found evidence linking the reported illnesses to service
in the gulf, reports of negative postdeployment symptoms spread and continued to be
received from soldiers from additional units. On March 6, 1995, at the annual conference of the Veterans of Foreign Wars in Washington, D.C., President Bill Clinton
acknowledged that many veterans were now apparently suffering from disabling illnesses, which “neither they nor their doctors know how they got” (Clinton, 1995, p. 4).
He said that, to “avoid the kinds of problems that delayed care and compensation for
those exposed to Agent Orange” (Clinton, 1995, p. 4), he had committed to increasing medical evaluations, research, and compensation and to appointing a Presidential
advisory committee to review and make recommendations regarding the government’s
efforts to find the causes of undiagnosed illnesses and chronic multisymptom illness
and improve the care Gulf war veterans were receiving.
Medical Evaluation of Gulf War Veterans and Research

In an effort to better understand what might be affecting the troops that returned from
the Persian Gulf, the departments of Defense and Veterans Affairs undertook clinical
and comparison studies and sponsored a wide range of research. DoD examined the
immediate health of deployed soldiers who were still on active duty, and the VA monitored long-term effects.
DoD’s Comprehensive Clinical Evaluation Program

On June 7, 1994, DoD instituted the Comprehensive Clinical Evaluation Program to
provide clinical and research information related to Gulf War health questions. The
evaluation program’s protocol consisted of clinical evaluation supervised by a boardcertified physician in either family practice or internal medicine. All participants were
asked about (1) medical and family histories, (2) symptoms, (3) number of days of work
lost due to illness during the 90 days prior to examination, and (4) any self-perceived
exposure in the Persian Gulf to a full panoply of environmental hazards and potentially
harmful substances, including petroleum products, pyridostigmine bromide pills, oilwell fire smoke, insect repellents, and anthrax and botulinum vaccinations. As of April
1996, 20,000 veterans had completed the evaluation program examinations.26 From
this group, the most common primary diagnosis reported was “diseases of the musculoskeletal system and connective tissue” (18.6 percent), with “pain in joint” (31 percent) being the most common specific diagnosis. Among the 3,558 participants with
a primary diagnosis of “symptoms, signs, and ill-defined conditions,” no single disease was predominant. Participants reported a wide variety of symptoms, with fatigue,

Research Advisory Committee on Gulf War Veterans’ Illnesses, 2008, pp. 7–9, highlights exposures to psychological stressors, Kuwaiti oil-well fires, depleted uranium, vaccines, pyridostigmine bromide, pesticide, nerve
agents, infectious disease, and combinations of exposures.
26

The following results were reported in Joseph, 1997.

The Unraveling of the Middle East

203

Figure 6.5
Key Responses to Reports of Ill Veterans of the Gulf War, 1992–1995
1992

1993
October 1993
Institute of Medicine
Committee to Review the Health Consequences
of Service During the Persian Gulf War
Sponsors: VA/DoD

August 1992
Expert Panel on Petroleum Toxicity
Sponsor: DoD

July 1993
Office of Technology Assessment
Workshop on Persian Gulf Health
December 1993–June 1994
Defense Science Board
Sponsor: DoD

1994
February 1994
Persian Gulf Expert Scientific Panel
Sponsor: VA

January 1994
Persian Gulf Veterans Coordinating Board
Sponsors: DoD/DHHS/VA
May 1994
Dr. Harrison Spencer
Dean, Tulane University School of Public Health
Independent Counsel
Sponsor: DoD

April 1994
National Institutes of Health
Technology Assessment Workshop Panel
Sponsors: DoD/DHHS/VA/EPA

June 1994
Institute of Medicine
Committee to Review DoD’s Comprehensive
Clinical Evaluation Program
Sponsor: DoD
March 1995
Senior Level Oversight Panel,
Persian Gulf Investigation Team,
and Declassification Program
Sponsor: DoD

1995
March 1995
Task Force on Analysis and Declassification
of Intelligence Records
Sponsor: CIA

Presidential Advisory Committee on Gulf War Veterans’ Illnesses
May 26, 1995

1996
November 1996
Special Assistant for Gulf War
Veterans’ Illnesses
Sponsor: DoD

November 1996
Special Assistant to the President
for Gulf War Veterans’ Illnesses
Sponsor: National Security Council

SOURCE: Presidential Advisory Committee on Gulf War Veterans’ Illnesses, 1996, p. 3.
NOTE: EPA = Environmental Protection Agency.

204

Providing for the Casualties of War: The American Experience Since World War II

headache, memory problems, and sleep disturbances being the most frequent complaints. However, there was no clinical indication of a new or unique syndrome.27
The VA’s National Health Survey of Gulf War Era Veterans and Their Families

In 1995, at the direction of Congress, the VA funded the National Health Survey
of Gulf War Era Veterans and Their Families research project, which compared the
health of 15,000 deployed veterans with that of 15,000 nondeployed veterans. Unlike
the DoD clinical study of the deployed, the VA’s study compared mail and telephone
survey responses and found that, “in comparison with their peers, Gulf veterans had
a higher prevalence of functional impairment, health care utilization, symptoms, and
medical conditions and a higher rate of low general health perceptions” (Kang et al.,
2000). A subsequent follow-up, undertaken in 2001, reported that, “[t]en years after
the Gulf War, the physical health of deployed and nondeployed veterans is similar.
However, Gulf War deployment is associated with an increased risk for fibromyalgia, chronic fatigue syndrome, skin conditions, [and] dyspepsia” (Eisen et al., 2005,
p. 881).28 In 2001, the VA Secretary “determined that there [was] no basis to establish a
presumption of service connection for any disease based on service in the Persian Gulf
during the Persian Gulf War” (Principi, 2001, p. 325702).
Gulf War Health Research

Since the end of the Gulf War, the federal government, through DoD, VA, and the
Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS), has funded more than 480
distinct projects, ranging from small pilot studies to large-scale epidemiological studies involving large populations, and major center–based research programs. Funding
for the FY 2006 through FY 2015 period was $245.8 million (Kalasinsky and Jaeger,
2016, p. 2).
The Presumption of Illnesses Associated with Service in the Persian Gulf War

With the recent experience with Agent Orange fresh on their minds, and in the face
of Gulf War veterans’ complaints rising on October 8, 1992, Congress passed the
Veterans Health Care Act of 1992 (Pub. L. 102-585, 1992), establishing the Persian
Gulf War Veterans Health Registry (Environmental Agents Service, 1992, p. 1). The
27

The IOM drew the same conclusion in reviewing the health effects of serving in the Gulf War. They reported
that
Gulf War veterans do not all experience the same array of symptoms has complicated efforts to determine
whether there is a “Gulf War syndrome” or overlap with other symptom-based disorders. The nature of the
symptoms suffered by many Gulf War veterans does not point to an obvious diagnosis, etiology, or standard
treatment. (Committee on Gulf War and Health, 2005, p. 17)

28

In 2014, the VA reported:
While 12 percent of all pre-9/11 Veterans had at least one service-connected disability and received health care
from VA, 17 percent of Veterans who deployed to the Persian Gulf have at least one service-connected disability
and received health care from VA. (Gulf War Veterans’ Illnesses Task Force, 2014, p. 8)

The Unraveling of the Middle East

205

following March (1993), the VA established “a ‘blue ribbon’ panel of experts to examine these concerns, including multiple chemical sensitivity, chronic fatigue syndrome,
and post-traumatic stress disorder.”29 This was followed on December 20, 1993, with
enactment of the Priority VA Health Care for Persian Gulf Veterans Act (Pub. L. 103210), which authorized VA to provide health-care services on a priority basis.30 In late
1994, Congress passed the Veterans’ Benefits Improvements Act of 1994 (Pub. L. 103446), which authorized the VA to compensate veterans
suffering from a chronic disability resulting from an undiagnosed illness or combination of undiagnosed illnesses that became manifest either during active duty
in the Southwest Asia theater of operations during the Persian Gulf War or to a
degree of ten percent or more within a presumptive period following such service.
(“Secretary Brown Praises Congress for Passage of Persian Gulf Legislation,” 1995,
p. 1)

Originally, these adverse health effects had to manifest within two years of service in the Persian Gulf, but the presumptive period was extended a number of times.
Compensation is now authorized for Gulf War veterans who show
signs or symptoms that may be a manifestation of an undiagnosed illness or a
chronic multisymptom illness [including] the following:
(1) Fatigue.
(2) Unexplained rashes or other dermatological signs or symptoms.
(3) Headache.
(4) Muscle pain.
(5) Joint pain.
(6) Neurological signs or symptoms.
(7) Neuropsychological signs or symptoms.
29

At the time the VA secretary said,
While most of the Persian Gulf veterans we are treating have health problems no different from those of other
veterans, a number of them have conditions that may be related to Gulf service which, so far, have eluded
diagnosis. I am determined that VA discover exactly just what is causing these problems and develop treatment
approaches to help these veterans. (“Secretary Brown Establishes ‘Blue Ribbon’ Panel . . . ,” 1993, p. 1)

30

According to the VA,
Prior to enactment of this legislation, . . . Persian Gulf War veterans who claimed exposure to toxic substances
and/or environmental hazards did not have the priority for VA medical services accorded to veterans who
receive services for conditions possibly related to exposure to Agent Orange or ionizing radiation. . . . Public
Law 103-210 equalized the entitlement.
[The law] . . . gave VA authority to waive the copayment requirement for . . . a Persian Gulf veteran for any condition that the treating physician medically determines is possibly related to that veteran’s Persian Gulf service.
The legislation also authorizes VA to, upon request, reimburse any veteran who paid a copayment, excluding
prescription copayments, for hospital care, nursing home care, or outpatient services, furnished by VA before
enactment of this law. (“President Signs Legislation Authorizing Priority Treatment,” 1994, p. 4)

206

Providing for the Casualties of War: The American Experience Since World War II

(8) Signs or symptoms involving the upper or lower respiratory system.
(9) Sleep disturbances.
(10) Gastrointestinal signs or symptoms.
(11) Cardiovascular signs or symptoms.
(12) Abnormal weight loss.
(13) Menstrual disorders. (38 U.S.C. § 1117)

The FY 2008 National Defense Authorization Act (NDAA) established a presumption of service connection for Gulf War veterans who develop an active mental illness. The domain of symptoms presumptively linked to Gulf War service was extended
by Congress with the passage of the Veterans Education and Benefits Expansion Act
of 2001, which expanded the definition of “qualifying chronic disability” to include
a “medically unexplained chronic multisymptom illness (such as chronic fatigue syndrome, fibromyalgia, and irritable bowel syndrome) that is defined by a cluster of signs
or symptoms” (Pub. L. 107-103, 2001, Subsec. 202 (a)).
Importantly, the basis for presumption was extended in 1994, from outcome (i.e.,
unexplained illnesses) to exposure to toxic agents, such as fumes and smoke from military operations, oil well fires, diesel exhaust, paints, pesticides, depleted uranium,
infectious/biological agents, chemical, or other toxic agents, environmental or wartime
hazard, and vaccines. (Samet and Bodurow, 2008, p. I-81). And, in 2010, nine specific
infectious diseases were added.31
Even as Congress was authorizing compensation for undiagnosed illnesses, it
ordered VA to commission a scientific review of what have been contributing to the
health effects veterans were experiencing. The reviews were done by the IOM, and
summary findings were reported in 2005, 2010, and 2016.32 Box 6.1 shows the IOM’s
final conclusions regarding the association between deployment to the Gulf War and
specific health concerns. On the association between illness and specific environmental exposures, IM found that
efforts to model or otherwise reconstruct the exposures that Gulf War veterans
experienced during deployment are also unlikely to yield useful results. . . .
Without definitive and verifiable individual veteran exposure information, further
studies to determine cause-and-effect relationships between Gulf War exposures
and health conditions in Gulf War veterans should not be undertaken. (Committee on Gulf War and Health, 2016, p. 10)

31

The infectious diseases are brucellosis, campylobacter jejuni, coxiella burnetti (Q fever), malaria, mycobacterium tuberculosis, nontyphoid salmonella, shigella, visceral leishmaniasis, and West Nile virus (Emrey-Arras,
2017, p. 6).

32

The summary findings were reported in Committee on Gulf War and Health, 2005; Committee on Gulf War
and Health, 2010; and Committee on Gulf War and Health, 2016.

The Unraveling of the Middle East

207

Box 6.1
Summary of Conclusions Regarding Associations Between Deployment to the Gulf War
and Specific Health Conditions
Sufficient Evidence of a Causal Relationship
• Posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD)
Sufficient Evidence of an Association
• Generalized anxiety disorder, depression, and substance abuse (particularly alcohol abuse)
• Gastrointestinal symptoms consistent with functional gastrointestinal disorders such as irritable bowel syndrome and functional dyspepsia
• Chronic fatigue syndrome
• Gulf War illness
Limited/Suggestive Evidence of an Association
• Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS)
• Fibromyalgia and chronic widespread pain
• Self-reported sexual difficulties
Inadequate/Insufficient Evidence to Determine Whether an Association Exists
• Any cancer
• Cardiovascular conditions or conditions of the blood and blood-forming organs
• Endocrine and metabolic conditions
• Neurodegenerative diseases other than ALS
• Neurocognitive and neurobehavioral performance
• Migraines and other headache disorders
• Other neurologic outcomes
• Respiratory diseases
• Structural gastrointestinal diseases
• Chronic skin conditions
• Musculoskeletal system diseases
• Genitourinary conditions
• Specific birth defects
• Adverse pregnancy outcomes such as miscarriage, stillbirth, preterm birth, and low birth
weight
• Fertility problems
• Increased mortality from any cancer, any neurologic disease (including multiple sclerosis,
Alzheimer’s disease, Parkinson’s disease, and ALS), respiratory disease, or gastrointestinal
disease
Limited/Suggestive Evidence of No Association
• Objective measures of peripheral neurologic conditions
• Multiple sclerosis
• Mortality from cardiovascular disease or parasitic diseases
• Decreased lung function
• Mortality due to mechanical trauma or other external causes
SOURCE: Quoted from Committee on Gulf War and Health, 2016, p. 263.

The Presidential Advisory Committee on Gulf War Veterans’ Illnesses

On May 26, 1995, President Clinton issued EO 12961, which established the PAC on
Gulf War Veterans’ Illnesses, to “conduct an independent, open, and comprehensive
review of all facets—risks, diagnosis, treatment, and research—related to health issues
and Gulf War service [and] . . . to make sure the government was doing all it could
as quickly as it could” (PAC, 1996, pp. 2–4). On December 31, 1996, the committee
submitted its final report to the secretaries of DoD, VA, and DHHS, concluding that,
in “all areas save one, the government has responded with a comprehensive series of

208

Providing for the Casualties of War: The American Experience Since World War II

measures to address Gulf War veterans’ illnesses” (PAC, 1996, p. iii). Speaking for the
committee, the chair, Dr. Joyce Lashof, said the following:
Many veterans clearly are experiencing medical difficulties connected to their service in the Gulf War. First and foremost, continuing to provide clinical care to
evaluate and treat veterans’ illnesses is vital. At the same time, however, a causal
link between a single factor and the symptoms Gulf War veterans currently report
remains elusive. And while the Committee finds that stress is likely to be an
important contributing factor to Gulf War veterans’ illnesses, the story is by no
means complete: Veterans, their physicians, and policymakers clearly stand to benefit from the broad array of ongoing research. . . .
The Committee is pained by the current atmosphere of government mistrust that
now surrounds every aspect of Gulf War veterans’ illnesses. It is regrettable—
but also understandable. Our investigation of the Department of Defense’s efforts
related to chemical weapons led us to conclude these early efforts have strained
public trust in our government. Hence, evidence of possible chemical warfare agent
exposures during the Gulf War must be thoroughly evaluated by a group independent of DOD. This process must be conducted in an open manner and include
veterans. The Committee recognizes that in November 1996 DOD announced it
was expanding its efforts related to low-level CW [chemical weapon] agent exposure. These initiatives—combined with independent, vigorous oversight—could
begin to restore public confidence in the government’s investigations of possible
incidents of CW agent exposure. (PAC, 1996, p. iii)
Office of the Special Assistant for Gulf War Illnesses

The “atmosphere of mistrust” Lashof referred to was the result of changing assessments
by the CIA and DoD on the possible exposure of troops to chemical weapons. The
initial assessment was that American troops had not been exposed to chemical weapons during their deployment to the Persian Gulf. In September 1995, the certainty of
that conclusion began to change when a reassessment of intelligence information from
the CIA and the Defense Intelligence Agency suggested that chemical agents may have
been released at the Iraqi weapon depot at Khamisiyah during the U.S. occupation of
the area. In May 1996, UN inspectors confirmed that 122 mm chemical rockets had
been stored at Khamisiyah. In June 1996, DoD changed its long-held position and
announced that, in March 1991, American troops had unknowingly destroyed sarinfilled rockets.
To say the least, the senior leadership of the Pentagon was not pleased with the
quality of the staff analysis they had previously relied on, which was now so clearly
wrong. In September 1996, the Deputy Secretary of Defense, Dr. John White, asked
the Assistant Secretary of the Navy (Manpower and Reserve Affairs), Dr. Bernard
D. Rostker—the author of this volume—to field a team to look at everything the
department was doing concerning Gulf War illnesses. On November 12, 1996, White

The Unraveling of the Middle East

209

announced the establishment of OSAGWI, to be headed by Rostker, to “do everything possible to understand and explain Gulf War illnesses, to inform the Gulf War
veterans and the American public of our progress, and then to ensure that DoD makes
whatever changes are required in equipment, policy and procedures” (OSAGWI, 1998,
p. 4). White gave Rostker broad authority to coordinate all aspects of DoD’s Gulf War
investigations but wanted him to focus on the war’s operational aspects and future
force protection issues. He emphasized the need for a communications program that
would reach out to the veterans and learn from them what went on during the Gulf
War. He stipulated that health-related programs—specifically, the clinical and health
research programs—would remain the responsibility of the Office of the Assistant
Secretary of Defense for Health Affairs. In OSAGWI’s first annual report, Rostker
highlighted the changes that were immediately introduced to meet President Clinton’s
charge to “leave no stone unturned”:
• We are listening to our veterans and incorporating what they tell us into our
investigations. We received almost twelve hundred postal letters and twentyseven hundred e-mail letters through the Internet. Our “veteran contact
managers” spoke with almost twenty-nine hundred veterans by phone.
• We have developed an outreach program including GulfLINK, GulfNEWS
and met with veterans at thirteen “Town Hall” meetings and four national
veterans conventions throughout the United States. We also frequently meet
with Veterans Service Organizations and Military Service Organizations to
discuss topics of interest to them.
• We are systematically investigating and reporting on possible chemical and
biological agent exposures. This included substantial field testing to determine the likely level of exposure resulting from the detonations of sarin filled
rockets at Khamisiyah [an Iranian weapon depot]. We have published four
information papers and nine case narratives.
• We have extended our inquiries to “other causes” for Gulf War illnesses, such
as the fumes from oil well fires, depleted uranium and pesticides. (OSAGWI,
1998, pp. 1–2)

In addition to spearheading the new focus on Gulf War illnesses, White provided
the resources to carry out the expanded mission. The Persian Gulf Illnesses Investigation Team, which OSAGWI replaced, had had a staff of four government employees and eight contractors. Plans for the new office originally called for a staff of 110,
a ninefold increase. By FY 1999, however, OSAGWI had grown to 196 personnel,
26 of whom were government employees, and the remainder were contractors. These
added resources allowed an expanded program in support of concerned veterans. In
its first four years, OSAGWI released 17 reports, called case narratives, on possible
exposures to chemical weapons, four environmental exposure reports, and nine information papers. In addition, OSAGWI commissioned the RAND Corporation to con-

210

Providing for the Casualties of War: The American Experience Since World War II

duct eight reviews of scientific literature pertaining to Gulf War illnesses.33 By 1999,
the GulfLINK website was being viewed by more than 200,000 visitors per month,
and in May 1998, Government Executive Magazine selected GulfLINK as one of the
“Best Feds on the Web.” GulfNEWS circulation expanded from its original 2,000 in
1997 to nearly 20,000 in 1999. To discuss the results of its investigations and to learn
about and respond to veterans’ concerns, OSAGWI staff conducted town hall meetings at 17 military installations and in 13 cities throughout the country and overseas.
OSAGWI answered approximately 11,500 hotline calls; fielded 6,991 emails; and sent
notification letters to some 162,500 veterans who served in the Gulf. It also worked
with individual Gulf War veterans to help them obtain their outpatient records from
the National Personnel Records Center in St. Louis, Missouri (OSAGWI, 2000).
Noting these, a PAC special report from October 1997 acknowledged that “DOD
has expanded significantly the resources it is devoting to Gulf War veterans’ illnesses,
. . . [and] the considerable improvement DOD has made in outreach to Gulf War veterans, particularly VSOs [veterans’ service organizations]” (PAC, 1997, p. 17). However, the PAC reiterated its “recommendation that an entity other than DOD (e.g.,
the President’s Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board or, again, NSF [National Science
Foundation]) perform oversight” (PAC, 1997, p. 21). The PAC report said that
the government’s credibility in addressing the health concerns of Gulf War veterans continues to be challenged. To be sure, room for improvement exists. The
government’s efforts have yielded significant improvements in services and essential, new knowledge—but, still, progress is gradual. Unfortunately, however, such
progress now often is viewed skeptically, at best. There remains a widespread and
deeply held view that the government is failing to adequately address the health
concerns of Gulf War veterans. In fact, the Committee perceives public mistrust
about the government’s handling of Gulf War veterans’ illnesses not only has
endured, but has expanded since the Final Report. This persistent atmosphere of
distrust ill serves the Nation. . . .
[T]he primary focus of the government’s efforts needs to shift from investigations
to the nth degree of individual incidents, to a process that will ensure that research
data and clinical improvements with a direct impact on veterans’ lives can be regularly accounted for and integrated into VA’s disability compensation and medical
benefits programs. (PAC, 1997, p. 23).
Special Oversight Board for DoD Investigation of Gulf War Chemical and Biological
Incidents

In accordance with the PAC’s recommendation—“to ensure full public accountability
and reinforce the commitment to an independent review, an entity other than DoD
33

The reports that emerged from this review can be found via the RAND’s webpage on Gulf War illnesses
(RAND Corporation, undated).

The Unraveling of the Middle East

211

should perform any oversight” (Rudman, 2000)—President Clinton signed EO 13075
on February 19, 1998, establishing the Special Oversight Board for Defense Department Investigation of Gulf War Chemical and Biological Incidents, with former U.S.
Senator Warren Rudman (R-New Hampshire) as its chairman. This board focused on
OSAGWI, and in its final report found the following (quoted from Rudman, 2000,
Ch. 9, “Findings” section):
• The Department of Defense and OSAGWI have worked diligently to fulfill
the President’s directive to “leave no stone unturned” in investigating the
possible causes of Gulf War illnesses.
• DoD has made no effort to deliberately withhold information from the general public or from veterans concerning its investigations or findings related
to Gulf War illnesses. On the contrary, DoD has made an extraordinary
effort to publicize its findings through the publication of reports and newsletters, public outreach meetings, briefings to veterans and active duty servicemembers, the creation of a toll-free hotline, and the creation of an actively
updated website.
• The Board finds that the revised case narrative methodology fully reflects
OSAGWI procedures and, more important, provides the most accurate
method for assessing the likelihood that chemical warfare agent exposures
may have occurred in the Persian Gulf.
• The Board finds that in each of its case narratives, OSAGWI makes assessments regarding the presence of chemical and biological warfare agents that
are consistent with available evidence.
• The Board finds that in each of its environmental exposure reports, OSAGWI
makes assessments regarding environmental exposures that are consistent
with available evidence.
• The Board finds that the Department of Defense appropriately implemented
ten of the twelve recommendations contained in the PAC Special Report.
(DoD was not required to act on two of the recommendations.)

In a summary, the board said that “DoD and VA have met the spirit of the PAC recommendations to search for the cause(s) of Gulf War illnesses” (Rudman, 2000, Ch. 2,
“New Directions” section).
The Institutional Legacy of Gulf War Illness: Looking Toward the Future

In September 1999, the special oversight board asked DoD to expand OSAGWI’s
“focus from strictly Gulf War issues to the development of a ‘future oriented’ organization that would also address the multiple aspects of military operations before, during,
and after a deployment” (Rudman, 2000, Ch. 2, “New Directions” section). As a
result, the Secretary of Defense established the Office of Special Assistant to the Secretary of Defense for Gulf War Illnesses, Medical Readiness, and Military Deployments.

212

Providing for the Casualties of War: The American Experience Since World War II

In 2001, the new administration of President George W. Bush took steps to consolidate and institutionalize the focus on deployment health. The new special assistant,
Dr. William Winkenwerder, Jr., was also the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Health
Affairs, and he soon incorporated the staff of the former special assistant’s office into
the established Deployment Health Support Directorate, reporting to the Deputy
Assistant Secretary of Defense for Force Health Protection and Readiness.34
After American troops had been deployed to Afghanistan, DoD leadership told
Congress that the “experiences of the Gulf War focused our attention on traditional
and nontraditional challenges to deployment health” (Embrey, 2002) and that the
department was committed to implementing many of the strategies the IOM had recommended in its comprehensive three-year study, Strategies to Protect the Health of
Deployed U.S. Forces (Joellenbeck, Russell, and Guze, 1999). That report highlighted
(1) Joint Staff actions to create and establish a vision for force health protection to support Joint Vision 2020; (2) the designation of the U.S. Army Center for Health Promotion and Preventive Medicine as the department’s lead agency to provide a comprehensive environmental surveillance program; (3) continued efforts to coordinate and
collaborate on medical research among DoD, VA, and DHHS through the Research
Working Group of the Military Veterans’ Health Coordinating Board; (4) sponsorship
of the Millennium Cohort Study, a longitudinal study to assess the health impact of
major elements of military service, especially deployments and their associated risks;35
and (5) the establishment of three deployment health centers—one each for health surveillance, health care, and health research—focusing on the prevention, treatment, and
understanding of deployment-related health concerns. Two centers are at Walter Reed,
and the third is at the Naval Health Research Center in San Diego.
Gulf War Illness Circa 2016

In 2016, the IOM published its tenth report on the Gulf War and health, noting that
reported health outcomes for Gulf War veterans
have been hampered by the relatively amorphous nature of the disorder and its
multiple definitions over the past two decades, including chronic multisymptom
illness, Gulf War syndrome, and multiple unexplained physical symptoms. Even
though the evidence base for Gulf War illness has increased over the past few years,
it has provided little new information that has increased our understanding of the
disease or how to effectively treat or manage it. . . .
The time that has elapsed since the war—25 years—brings with it the potential to
impact veterans’ recall of events, . . . [and] advancing age can provoke new health
34
35

As reported to Congress in Winkenwerder, 2002.

This study involves a cross-sectional sample of over 140,000 military personnel who will be followed prospectively every three years over a 21-year period, through 2022.

The Unraveling of the Middle East

213

concerns and the development of new diseases long after the war. In any population, it can be difficult to distinguish aging-related effects from those caused by a
war many years ago. (Committee on Gulf War and Health, 2016, p. ix)

About the same time that the IOM was looking at the medical evidence, the VA
reported the results of the 2012 survey of Gulf War and nondeployed Gulf War–era
veterans, that “Veterans of . . . [the Gulf] war continue to report poorer health than
those who served at the same time but did not see service in the Gulf” (DVA, 2016a).
More specifically,
Diseases that have been associated with Gulf War service—such as Gulf War Illness presenting as chronic multisymptom illness, chronic fatigue syndrome, and
fibromyalgia and dermatitis—were also significantly more likely to be reported by
the Gulf War deployed. Gulf War veterans also reported more health care utilization than Gulf Era veterans. (Dursa et al., 2016, p. 43)

Accordingly, the VA renewed its call for Gulf War veterans with these symptoms
to apply for disability compensation, as the following notice in the Gulf War Newsletter made clear:
For Gulf War Veterans, VA presumes that unexplained symptoms are related to
Gulf War service if a Veteran has experienced them for six months or more. The
“presumptive” illness(es) must have first appeared during active duty in the Southwest Asia theater of military operations or by December 31, 2016, and be at least
10 percent disabling.
If you are a Gulf War Veteran who may experience a cluster of medically unexplained chronic symptoms that can include fatigue, headaches, joint pain, indigestion, insomnia, dizziness, respiratory disorders, and memory problems, VA presumes that some health conditions were caused by military service. In practical
terms, Gulf War Veterans who meet certain criteria don’t have to prove an association between their illness and military service. By assuming a link between symptoms and military service, it can simplify and speed up the application process for
benefits. (VHA, 2016c, p. 7)

What the VA did not tell veterans was that the likelihood of their claim receiving a positive response was very low. Very few of the 700,000 veterans of the Gulf
War appear to have been successful in pressing disability claims based on the medical
issues the VA highlighted. Generally, the VA does not track the number of presumptive
service-connected disability claims filed, granted, or denied. However, in 2006, the VA
did report to the IOM that, of the roughly 700,000 who served in the Gulf, 3,259 Gulf
War veterans with undiagnosed illness were receiving disability payments as a result of
a presumption of a service connection and that the “typical” disability severity rating
was 10 percent (Samet and Bodurow, 2008, p. 62).

214

Providing for the Casualties of War: The American Experience Since World War II

More recently, the GAO examined the VA’s processing of Gulf War veterans’ disability claims for three medical issues: undiagnosed illnesses, medically unexplained
chronic multisymptom illnesses, and nine specific infectious diseases. The GAO
reported that, during FYs 2010–2015, the overall approval rate for Gulf War veterans
with these medical issues was 17 percent,36 compared with 57 percent for non–Gulf
War veterans. The average approval rates were approximately 13 percent for undiagnosed illness medical issues, 29 percent for medically unexplained chronic multisymptom illness medical issues, and 14 percent for medical issues related to certain
infectious diseases (Emrey-Arras, 2017, p. 18). In 2015, the approval rate for medically
unexplained chronic multisymptom illness was 22.6 percent, and that for undiagnosed
illness was 10.2 percent.37
VA officials told the GAO, “These Gulf War Illness medical issues may be denied
at a higher rate, in part, because . . . Gulf War illness is not always well understood
by the VA staff,38 and veterans sometimes do not have the medical records to adequately support their claims” (Emrey-Arras, 2017, p. 19). It may also be that the level of
disability-associated medically unexplained chronic multisymptom illnesses and
undiagnosed illnesses among the Gulf War veterans filing claims is less than what
is required to warrant compensation.39 However, VA did tell the GAO that “many
of the veterans with denied Gulf War medical issues had other related medical issues
approved, and, as a result, many veterans still received some disability compensation
from VA” (Emrey-Arras, 2017, p. 18).
36

A single veteran claim can contain many medical issues, and each issue is adjudicated separately. The 2010–
2015 Gulf War illness approval rate of 17 percent reflected 18,000 positive judgments on 102,000 medical issues
rated. Overall, the VA considered 24.7 million medical issues from all veterans and determined that compensation should be awarded for 14 of them (Emrey-Arras, 2017, p. 18).

37

Computed from Table 1, “Approval Rates by VBA Regional Office for Medically Unexplained Chronic Multisymptom Illness and Undiagnosed Illness Medical Issues Completed in Fiscal Year 2015,” in Emrey-Arras, 2017,
pp. 39–40.

38

For example, GAO reported that,
[a]ccording to several VBA [Veterans Benefits Administration] claim rating staff we interviewed, VHA [Veterans Health Administration] medical examiners sometimes provide a medical opinion related to service connection when one is not necessary because the veteran has a presumptive condition . . . If VBA claim raters do not
recognize that the medical examiner has provided an unnecessary medical opinion about service connection for
a presumptive condition, they may inadvertently deny a claim. (Emrey-Arras, 2017, p. 22)

39

To qualify for disability compensation under a presumptive service connection based on symptoms of undiagnosed illness or medically unexplained chronic multisymptom illness, Gulf War veterans need to present evidence of a disabling condition with a 10 percent or greater disability rating, and their illness(es) or symptom(s)
must be “chronic,” i.e., exhibited intermittently or constantly for 6 months (Emrey-Arras, 2017, p. 8).

CHAPTER SEVEN

The Continued Unraveling of the Middle East: Operation
Enduring Freedom, Operation Iraqi Freedom, and Beyond

On June 21, 2001, Secretary of Defense Donald H. Rumsfeld told the Senate Armed
Service Committee:
Today America is strong; we face no immediate threat to our existence as a nation
or our way of life; we live in an increasingly democratic world, where our military
power working in concert with friends and allies helps contribute to peace, stability, and growing prosperity. (Rumsfeld, 2001)

He warned, however, that
recent history should make us humble. It tells me that the world of 2015 will
almost certainly be little like today and, without doubt, notably different from
what today’s experts are confidently forecasting. (Rumsfeld, 2001)

Less than three months later, Rumsfeld’s doubt about the durability of his forecast came to pass.1 On September 11, 2001, the United States was attacked by alQaeda, a militant Sunni Islamist global organization founded in 1988 by Osama bin
Laden that, at the time of the attack, was based in Afghanistan. For the American
people, the hijacking of four airplanes and the subsequent attacks on the World Trade
Center in New York and the Pentagon in Washington, D.C., and the loss of Flight 93
in Shanksville, Pennsylvania, were as traumatic as the attack on Pearl Harbor, which
had brought the United States into World War II. For the military, however, it proved
to be a pivotal shift that rivaled the dropping of the atomic bomb on Hiroshima that
ushered in the atomic age.2 The American military had long maintained the basic
structure and doctrine that had been honed during World War II and employed and
1

Rumsfeld would later write, “surprise was inevitable” (Rumsfeld, 2011, p. 297).

2

Harry Laver drove home this point:
In September 2001, government officials, members of the military, and citizens across the United States drew
parallels between the terrorist attacks on the American homeland and the December 1941 bombing of Pearl
Harbor. . . .

215

216

Providing for the Casualties of War: The American Experience Since World War II

improved during the conflicts in Korea, Vietnam, and the lighting 100-hour campaign
of Desert Storm. Over the next decade and a half, during OEF in Afghanistan and
OIF in Iraq, the U.S. military learned to fight a new kind of war against new kinds of
enemies.3 But in September 1991, all this lay ahead.
On the Eve of 9/11
The Army

The end of the Cold War precipitated a rethinking of America’s role in the world
and reconsideration of the military force structure, a “rethink” that predated even the
first Gulf War of 1991 (see Bush, 1990). By the time of 9/11, the resulting drawdown
and restructuring (see Rostker, 2007, pp. 653–711) had produced an Army whose end
strength was 40 percent lower than it had been after Vietnam and one-third smaller
than during Operation Desert Storm (see Figure 7.1). With these reductions came cuts
in the Army’s medical programs.4 Nevertheless, this smaller Army was designed to
fight a conventional enemy, with some defense planners pressing for an even smaller
Army transformed by emphasizing informational warfare and standoff technologies,
one that did not stress the physical presence of soldiers, “boots-on-the ground,” at

A more appropriate and useful point of comparison, especially from a strategic planning perspective, is 6 August
1945, when the detonation of an atomic bomb signaled a sea change in warfare. . . .
On 11 September 2001, another paradigm shift occurred. Terrorism was added to the post-1945 conventional
and nuclear strategic equation as an equally significant third factor. The Bush Administration faced a challenge
similar to that which strategic planners had encountered at the opening of the nuclear age, to create an effective and rational defense policy in a world that had been radically altered, one by atomic weapons, the other by
terrorism. (Laver, 2005, pp. 107–108)
3

OEF began on October 7, 2001, when the United States launched military operations in Afghanistan, including airstrikes against Kabul and Kandahar. In sustaining military operations for more than a decade, American
troops continued to fight a widespread insurgency and establish a viable government. U.S. combat operations
in Afghanistan ended on December 31, 2014. As part of Operation Freedom’s Sentinel, U.S. forces remain in
the country to participate in a coalition mission to train, advise, and assist Afghan National Defense and Security Forces and to conduct counterterrorism operations against the remnants of al-Qaeda, the Taliban, and the
Islamic State. At the end of the first quarter of FY 2018, “there were roughly 14,000 U.S. troops in Afghanistan”
(Lead Inspector General for Overseas Contingency Operations, 2017, p. 2).
On March 20, 2003, the U.S. and coalition forces launched OIF. U.S. troops seized Baghdad after just 21 days.
A broad insurgency followed over the next seven years. U.S. combat operations ended on September 1, 2010.
American troops remained in the country to advise Iraqi security forces as part of Operation New Dawn (OND)
until the final withdrawal on December 15, 2011. Operation Inherent Resolve (OIR) is the U.S. and coalition
effort to support Iraqi Security Force operations with limited military operations against the Islamic State, starting on August 8, 2014.

4

For a discussion of the reductions in the Army’s medical program during the 1970s, 1980s, and the post–Cold
War 1990s, see Marble, 2015.

The Continued Unraveling of the Middle East

217

Figure 7.1
Army End Strength from the End of Vietnam to 9/11
800

Personnel (thousands)

700
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
1973 1975 1977 1979 1981 1983 1985 1987 1989 1991 1993 1995 1997 1999 2001
FY
SOURCE: Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness, 2003, Table D-15.

which the traditional Army excelled.5 Here is how the 1990s, the decade after the Gulf
War, unfolded for the Army and the situation the Army faced on the eve of 9/11.
President George H. W. Bush’s Base Force

In January 1990, President George H. W. Bush proposed that the nation “transition
to a restructured military” that would incorporate “a new strategy that is more flexible,
more geared to contingencies outside of Europe while continuing to meet our inescapable
responsibilities to NATO [the North Atlantic Treaty Organization] and while maintaining the global balance.”6 The Joint Chiefs of Staff, led by its chairman, General Colin
Powell, developed a concept of a minimum, or base, force (see DoD, 1992b, p. 19).
With the end of the Cold War, Powell thought it possible for the United States to cut
defense spending by 25 percent and maintain an ability to fight two major theater wars
simultaneously, without help from any of our allies, against an enemy whose forces
were qualitatively equal to ours. This vision of future warfare was largely modeled
after Operation Desert Storm, which to some, including Marine Corps Gen. Anthony

5

Michael E. O’Hanlon reports:
Early in Rumsfeld’s tenure, the secretary’s study groups were talking about slashing the active duty Army from
10 to eight divisions or even less. . . . Predictably, the Army fought very hard against this idea . . . [and] won
the debate, and the September 2001 QDR [Quadrennial Defense Review] preserved Clinton’s Army virtually
intact. (O’Hanlon, 2003)

6

As quoted by Senator Sam Nunn in his March 22 floor speech (Nunn, 1990).

218

Providing for the Casualties of War: The American Experience Since World War II

Zinni, Commanding General of USCENTCOM, was a mistake.7 “Desert Storm . . .
was an aberration,” he wrote:
In the high- and top-level war colleges, we still fight the Saddam Hussein type
of adversary, an adversary stupid enough to confront us symmetrically with less
of everything, so we always win. But we are confronted with the likes of a wiser
Saddam Hussein and a still-elusive Osama bin Laden—just a couple of the charmers out there who no longer will take us on with a symmetric force matchup.
In still trying to fight our kind of war, be it Desert Storm or World War II, we
ignore the real warfighting requirements of today. (Zinni, 2000)

Zinni’s concerns notwithstanding,8 the Army embarked on its own transformational program through the rest of the decade.9 Small-scale contingencies and operations, such as counterdrug operations and humanitarian support, were the “lesser
included cases” of a force still primarily designed to fight and win a conventional war.
President Bill Clinton’s Bottom-Up Review Force

The legacy the Bush administration left for the new Clinton administration that took
office in January 1993 was the Base Force. Even with American troops struggling in
Somalia; the recognition of the importance of peacekeeping and peace enforcement;
and humanitarian operations reflected in the new tagline, the Full Spectrum Force
(see DoD, 1997, p. 21), the focus was still on conventional forces winning “two major
regional contingencies” (DoD, 1995, p. 15). That focus did not change even after a
terrorist attack on the World Trade Center in New York in 1993, the bombing of our
embassies in East Africa in 1998, and the attack on the USS Cole in the Yemeni port of
Aden in 2000. What did undermine the complacency of the Army was its disappointing performance in orchestrating the deployment of troops to Albania to prepare for a

7

A 2000 National Defense University report commented on the divergent views of future warfare, noting
the relative rarity of American military involvement in major theater warfare against cross-border aggression.
From this perspective, Desert Storm is an exception rather than a rule. Given the apparent increase in the
number and frequency of nonstate threats and the potential for asymmetric operations, it has been suggested
that the primacy of the DoD focus on preparing for classic MTWs [major theater wars] is a mistake. The threats
of the future, according to this view, will be significantly different and will require a different emphasis in
preparations. (Tangredi, 2000, pp. 100–101; emphasis in the original)

8

Zinni’s admonition rang true in Afghanistan, as the Army’s account notes:
The Army’s COIN [counterinsurgency] doctrine had languished over the previous two decades. With the
exception of the Army’s Special Forces (SF), no units had trained to conduct COIN. While commanders in late
2003 and 2004 made the transition to COIN with enthusiasm and flexibility, there was still a gap in knowledge
and experience that had to be overcome. (Wright et al., 2010, p. 324)

9

For a comprehensive discussion of the Army’s transformation during the 1990s, see Brown, 2011.

The Continued Unraveling of the Middle East

219

possible military action in Kosovo in 1999.10 It brought into question the Army’s plans
for transformation, leading Secretary of Defense William Cohen to direct the new
Chief of Staff of the Army, GEN Eric Shinseki,11 to develop plans for a lighter, more
deployable force.12 For most of the Clinton years, however, under the rubric of Force
XXI,13 transformation meant the Army moving forward along traditional lines based
on digital information technologies, e.g., sensors and digital command and control
systems. Some in the Office of the Secretary of Defense (OSD) wanted to reduce the
Army’s force structure even further than planned by jettisoning two divisions to free
funds for modernization and to shift funds from ground to air and naval forces,14 even
as some cautioned that the information age would not necessarily mean fewer boots on
the ground,15 and others argued “that no foreseeable technology offered ‘silver bullets’
reliable enough to justify doing away with balanced combinations of arms” (Brown,
2011, p. 226).
President George W. Bush’s Transformational Force

The path that George W. Bush’s administration followed was laid out in his policy
speech at The Citadel, the military college in South Carolina, on September 23, 1999,
almost two years to the day before the attack on America. The then–Republican candidate for President promised to transform the American military. He promised “a revolution in the technology of war” in which size would be replaced by “mobility and
swiftness.” As he saw it, “[t]his revolution perfectly matches the strengths of our country—the skill of our people and the superiority of our technology. The best way to
10

The history of the Army’s operations in support of 1999’s Operation Joint Guardian recounts the following:
The awkward deployment of Task Force Hawk and problems with the initial U.S. insertion into Kosovo troubled military commanders. Both tasks were completed, but because contingency plans for rapid deployment
were inflexible, yet not always defined in full, nothing went as smoothly as expected. (Phillips, 2007, p. 53)

11

Shinseki became Chief of Staff immediately after Kosovo, and one of his first tasks was to “parlay criticisms
of Task Force Hawk into a mandate for accelerated transformation” (Brown, 2011, p. 191).

12

At the time, I was Under Secretary of the Army and was privy to the letter of instruction General Shinseki
received from Secretary Cohen when he assumed the position of Chief of Staff.

13

In 1994, Force XXI developed along two lines. Army’s Training and Doctrine Command redesigned operational forces, and the newly established Army Digitization Office developed and field-tested digital information
technologies. This was later extended and called the Army After Next. See Donnelly, 2007, pp. 5–9.

14

Brown notes that the debate was contentious “in the Quadrennial Defense Review that reported out in 1997
(QDR1997), [and] remained robust and lively during the Quadrennial Defense Review that reported out in 2001
(QDR2001)” (Brown, 2011, pp. 224–225).

15

For example, in 1995, a group of information-age enthusiasts gathered at the Army’s Arroyo Center at RAND
to discuss the implications of the information revolution for the future of the Army. They saw a future in which
“sensors, not communications or computing, will be the bottleneck on information” and argued that “[t]he best
broad-bandwidth sensor on the battlefield may be the soldier, not a coupled electronic device” (Nichiporuk and
Builder, 1995, p. 65), particularly “in forested, hilly terrain, . . . in canopied jungle, or in urban areas . . . finding
the enemy, especially when he operates in small units, is difficult at a distance” (Nichiporuk and Builder, 1995,
p. 67).

220

Providing for the Casualties of War: The American Experience Since World War II

keep the peace,” he told his audience, “is to redefine war on our terms” (Bush, 1999).
In the Presidential debates of that year, he railed against “nation building” and policies
that extended our troops to carry out what he saw as nonmilitary missions. He carried
forward this vision after becoming President, telling the graduating class at the Naval
Academy that
[w]e must build forces that draw upon the revolutionary advances in the technology of war that will allow us to keep the peace by redefining war on our terms.
I’m committed to building a future force that is defined less by size and more by
mobility and swiftness, one that is easier to deploy and sustain, one that relies more
heavily on stealth, precision weaponry, and information technologies. (Bush, 2001)

On June 21, 2001, the new Secretary of Defense, Donald Rumsfeld, expanded on
Bush’s ideas, telling the Senate Armed Services Committee that it was his goal to build
a defense strategy that would prepare us “for the emerging threats we will all face in
this new and still dangerous century” (Rumsfeld, 2001). By one account, this included
discarding the “two major war” strategy in favor of a strategy for “handling murkier
situations,” a change that one observer thought had the “gravest implications for the
Army, the most manpower-intensive service in wartime” (Ricks and Pincus, 2001).16
The Army had very different views on how transformation should be carried out
from those of Bush and Rumsfeld. For the Army, transformation was evolutionary, and
it intended to be ready to fight, “at any given time . . . at any level of intensity.” Its leaders thought that technologies needed to be “proven before they were relied upon” and
that “many functions might never be particularly amenable to technological solutions,
requiring the steadiness and collective individual efforts of ‘boots on the ground’”
(Brown, 2011, p. 236).
By contrast, for Bush and Rumsfeld, transformation was revolutionary.
Rumsfeld, a former naval officer with a strong background in airpower and missile
defense, saw the revolution in military affairs in terms of “networked systems, information dominance, remote sensors, and precision-guided munitions” and a diminished
role for “manpower-intensive ground combat power, particularly that of the Army’s
heavy forces” (Brown, 2011, p. 226). He was “willing to ‘skip a generation’ in development to free up funding for ‘leap ahead’ technologies” (Brown, 2011, p. 236). Indeed,
as one observer notes, Bush and Rumsfeld
were willing to take risks and force their vision on contemporary battlefields,
believing technology was already far enough along to do away with much of the
mass the Army considered prudent. Ground forces seemed destined to be bit play-

16

The 2001 QDR noted the shift in the “focus of U.S. force planning from optimizing for conflicts in two particular regions—Northeast and Southwest Asia—to building a portfolio of capabilities that is robust across the
spectrum of possible force requirements, both functional and geographical” (DoD, 2001, p. 17).

The Continued Unraveling of the Middle East

221

ers in their futuristic vision. Some of the missions most consumptive of boots on
the ground were dismissed as “washing windows,” best contracted out to lesser
allies. This overlooked the historical phenomenon that allies are seldom willing to
risk the blood of their soldiers if the United States is not willing to do so as well.
(Brown, 2011, p. 236)

The differences in approach and philosophy led to debates not only over military strategy but also over future defense plans, as envisioned in the 2001 QDR (DoD, 2001);
after 9/11, on what forces were to be deployed in Afghanistan; and later, on how the
wars in Afghanistan and Iraq would be prosecuted. The dispute eventually cost Secretary of the Army Thomas White his job and alienated Army Chief of Staff Eric
Shinseki from the Bush administration.17 However, on 9/11, the Bush-Rumsfeld vision
of a transformed military relying more on technology than manpower had not yet
taken hold. The Army that was available to go into battle was not the high-tech force
Bush and Rumsfeld envisioned but the conventional one honed during the Clinton
years and geared to fight a conventional enemy. As a result, it was largely unprepared
for the COIN and nation-building missions that would so consume it in the decade
to come. The one exception was the special operations forces (SOF), which had been
strengthened with the creation of U.S. Special Operations Command (USSOCOM).
But, even then, at the time of the 9/11 attack, there was no “Unconventional Warfare
. . . plan for Afghanistan” (USSOCOM, 2007, p. 87).
The American Soldier on the Eve of 9/11

In 2001, the American military had operated without conscription for 28 years. Over
that time, the personnel structure of the Regular Army had changed dramatically. The
enlisted force of 2001 was more senior, with more experienced soldiers in its ranks and
many more females (see Figure 7.2), than the force of 1973, when the draft ended.
Although women constitute a smaller proportion of the Total Force than men, their
representation has grown greatly since the inception of the all-volunteer force, increasing by an average of four-tenths of a percentage point each year (see Office of the
Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness, 2003). While women were
not given positions in the ground combat arms, they were assigned combat support
jobs that would put them in harm’s way (Williams and Staub, 2005).
17

The Army’s history of its transformation efforts notes that the
differences in approach and philosophy led to recurrent debates [that] . . . inevitably spilled out of the Pentagon
and into public forums. . . . When Baghdad fell, Rumsfeld and his colleagues considered themselves vindicated. Despite a few misgivings about residual messiness, most commentators saw the campaign as a brilliant
victory and perhaps, like Afghanistan, yet another harbinger of the new way of war. Within a few weeks, President Bush would pilot a fighter onto an aircraft carrier grandly bearing the banner “Mission Accomplished.”
Rumsfeld chose not to continue his contention with the Army leadership. He fired White, a political appointee, on 1 May. Shinseki was to retire a little over a month later; Rumsfeld did not attend his 12 June departure
ceremony. (Brown, 2011, p. 236)

