DR. LASHOF: We are ready to move to our next panel
which is a discussion of the modeling of the troop exposure at
Khamissiyah and the pit demolition. And I'm very please that
we have with us Dr. Bernard Rostker, Col. Larry Cereghino -- is
that correct? -- Dr. Rick Barbarsky and Mr. Robert Walpole. If
you'll all come forward together I think we can proceed to that
testimony.
Dr. Rostker, I assume you will be kicking it off or
one of your --
DR. ROSTKER: Actually, Mr. Walpole will.
DR. LASHOF: Mr. Walpole, very good.
MR.ROSTKER: Let me just put it in a little
perspective.
DR. LASHOF: Okay.
DR. ROSTKER: As you know, we have been working very
hard for a number of months to provide the best possible
estimate as we can as to what happened at Khamissiyah. This is
but one of three assessments that are currently under way,
either by the CIA and DOD or DOD alone. The special assistant
to the secretary of defense for intelligence oversight is
working on an intelligence assessment of Khamissiyah and any
other related sites in Iraq. His work is still forthcoming
although we have seen the raw material of his works in terms of
his review of the intelligence messages and databases.
We also have a completely independent assessment
under way of military operations around Khamissiyah and in
southern Iraq being done by the Army inspector general. In
that regard we have made sure that the Army inspector general
has all of the leads that we have and is addressing all of the
questions that we have in terms of who knew what when and what
were the operational responses. But as typical with an
inspector general operation, they have not shared with us their
findings except in general to say they don't expect that there
are any great surprises. But that full report is still
forthcoming.
The issue of the explosions in Khamissiyah will be
the subject of this discussion. It is very important, in our
judgment, that we go -- had gone through this detailed
assessment especially six years after the fact because this is
the raw material of a lot of follow-on research,
epidemiological research in which we really needed to know who
may have been exposed to what and how much. And we feel that
this is as definitive an answer as is possible at this time
resulting from substantial testing and involvement of a myriad
of organizations both within and outside the Department of
Defense to ensure that we have the best possible assessment.
Bob Walpole will discuss the actions that the CIA
took to reduce uncertainty and then I will discuss the actual
plumes and our assessment of troops that may have been exposed.
Now, we're prepared to talk to you about the modeling and any
of the activities that went into that, particularly the tests
at Dugway and the follow-on tests at Edgewood in terms of
evaporation from soil and from the wood, the wooden crates that
absorbed a good deal of the material. And I think with that
Bob, do you want to start?
MR. WALPOLE: Dr. Lashof, members of the committee
and staff, I'm pleased to appear before you today to discuss
CIA's continuing efforts in support of the US government effort
on Gulf War illnesses and particularly to discuss Khamissiyah
and the pit release there.
This has been a joint effort with DOD in every sense
of the word, with significant coordination going on that's
included weekly joint meetings, hundreds of people in multiple
agencies, dozens of experts involved with expertise from the
upper atmosphere all the way down to characteristics in the
soil, as Dr. Rostker mentioned. If I can start with the first
slide.
In September, 1995, CIA analysts had determined that
Khamissiyah was a point that we needed to spend more attention
on. It was a site of potential chemical agent release. In
fact, you remember one of the analysts was listening to a
radio, a tape of a radio show in March of '96 and determined
that the bunkers that are being described here got to be the
Khamissiyah site. In May of '96, Iraq told UNSCOM inspectors
that the chemical weapons destroyed there -- we can go to the
next slide -- were destroyed by US forces.
Now, earlier UNSCOM had indicated coalition forces
had destroyed the bunkers and that's up in this area here. It
was '96 that they had indicated the pit area was one that
needed to be looked at. This committee and the staff of the
National Security Council directed us to begin modeling efforts
for both bunker 73 and the pit as well as al Muthanna and
Muhammidiyat which were mentioned earlier today. We were able
to complete the modeling in the al Muthanna and Muhammidiyat
and bunker 73 because they were all buildings and we had ground
testing from the '60s that told us how an agent would react
when destroyed inside a building. We did not have that kind of
data for what would happen in an open pit demolition.
Now, what you've got in your books, you've got a
package called uncertainties. That was a larger package we
prepared for a press conference a few weeks ago. I really
won't be referring directly to that today. You've got a
package called modeling, the pit issue, and that was dated the
24th. That was for last weeks press conference. I will be
drawing slides from that package as well as a brand new package
you were handed that started with the map and as basically
backup, you've graphed some photographs that I'll be referring
to. I've also brought a one-minute video of the Dugway testing
that I think some of you have not seen before so there will be
value there.
Now as we indicated before, we had great
uncertainties in what the agent would do. In addition to those
uncertainties we were uncertain about the weather, what the
weather was doing. If I can go to the next slide. We
increased the number of interviews that we were having with the
soldiers -- actually the number of soldiers, from two soldiers
to five, which is more than a 100 percent increase obviously --
and it helped us address some of the contradictions in their
stories. It helped us ascertain that the events all occurred
on March 10th. There was a log entry on March 12th of a
certain number of rockets destroyed. The soldiers unitedly
told us that the log was prepared after the fact and that we
should not place credibility on that date. They described the
events in all parts of the pit which gave us confidence that
yes, they did in fact do that. In fact, two of the soldiers
had left for Saudi Arabia after the 10th, so they could not
have done any of this activity on the 12th. So we're very
confident that it all occurred on the 10th.
We had the Institute Defense Analysis review panel
that went over the efforts that we had performed before, made
recommendations, they provided a significant amount of
meteorological expertise on this issue. We refined the source
term -- and I'm going to come into that in more detail, Dugway
testing I'll come into more detail as well -- on the new
sources for our meteorology. If I can go to the next slide.
This is one of those wonderful slides that you put up
and hope people simply believe you because to look at it you
can't see a whole lot. But what we have is soot patterns from
a bunch of bunkers that are blown up. We were able to identify
which bunkers were blown up on March 10th. And then tracking
the pattern of the soot, we're able to ascertain the direction
of the wind at the time of demolition. And the demolition of
those bunkers and the demolition of the pit occurred at either
exactly the same time or the pit was just a few minutes
afterwards. So the wind was, was the same. If I can go to the
next slide.
This next one is a helicopter shot, it's upside down
but it doesn't matter. What it basically shows is that yes, we
are talking about soot and debris and if you really studied
that one in your package you can study that closer, you see the
debris that was coming from the sites.
The next shot -- and you'll be able to tell this a lot
better in your individual packages -- the red arrows up here
are all the azimuth lines drawn. And so what was done, we took
the soot patterns, drew the azimuth and determined that the
wind was 335 degrees, coming from the north-northwest blowing
to the south-southeast. That was critical for starting any
modeling exercise. With al Muthanna and Muhammadiyat we don't
have the exact data at detonation so we don't know the
direction of the wind. We could not apply this model until we
have that sort of information. The next slide please.
I promised I would come back to the refining the
source term. We spent a lot of time determining how many
rockets were actually in the pit at the time. You could tell
from Mr. Duelfer's presentation this morning that the Iraqi
declaration numbers don't always add up. In fact, they
generally don't add up. So you have to do some interpolation
to make sense of those numbers. The Iraqi's, for example,
declared that there were 1.100 rockets in the pit at the time
of our demolition. They've recently declared that about half
the number at Khamissiyah, which you saw in Mr. Duelfer's
records this morning, 2,160 were in the pit. Well that would
be 1,080. We have always believed there were more than 1,100
in the pit.
We still believe there were more than 1,100 in the
pit based on those soldier's stories. They explain the height
of the stacks, there were thirteen stacks in the pit. Some
were over their heads, some were down at chin level. We, based
on photography and measuring the height of the stacks -- you
usually don't measure the height, you measure shadows cast by
the stacks and then use that to calculate the height -- and
with their testimony and the photography we have corroborating
which stacks were higher and which were lower, we calculate
that we have a best estimate of 1,250. Fourteen hundred is an
upper bound. It's a number that you've heard me use before and
that is assuming all stacks are the full height -- which we
know from the soldiers testimony they weren't and as well as
from the other information I described -- but that would still
be an upper bound.
Now, in the amount of agent for rocket -- oh, the
next slide shows you some of the efforts that we went through
with what the stacks looked like. These are huge stacks of
rockets. We've got a guy standing by one so you can see that.
And we, we had people going through various ways so they could
have the interviews with the soldiers and talk in a cogent
manner with what they were describing.
That's right, this is an artist's representation. I
mean, I think you can, maybe you can't tell from the back but
this is not a photograph. If we had a photograph like this
before the demolition, that would have been tremendous. We
don't have that. We're creating this information after the
fact.
Now on to the, on to the amount of agent per rocket.
The next slide please. Yeah, it's 6.3 kilograms per rocket.
We had carried 8 kilograms -- if you can do the next slide now.
This is a photograph and what I've got in my hand is, is a
piece of one of these, the point end, the one to the right.
This is one of the inserts. Now, in preparing for the Dugway
testing we had to have somebody manufacture some of these
inserts. In manufacturing the inserts we discovered that they
could not hold 8 kilograms of chemical agent; they could only
hold 6.3 kilograms. The 8 kilogram number we had been using
included the mass of the plastic inserts. So we had to revise
that information.
The next couple of slides show different views of the
warhead. This is one that we got from UNSCOM, cut-away view so
you can see what the warhead is like. This was essential --
the next slide as well -- of a breakdown view of the warhead --
essential for us to be able to do modeling at Dugway, or the
testing at Dugway, that would have any validity at all.
All right, now the last thing I was going to talk
about on source term is the agent purity. And the next slide.
The agent purity is 50 percent; that's what we used for our
model. The UNSCOM when they were there in October of '91 had
drilled a hole in one of the rockets and taken samples. Those
samples tested out at 10 percent purity. That was six months
after the demolition so we couldn't use that number. We knew
it was higher than that. Iraqis had claimed that they had 70
percent purity. We did not know at the time of the Iraqi claim
whether that was the upper bound or their average.
We've got Iraqi production records and that gives us
a range of 40 to 60 percent at the time of demolition. In fact
-- if you do the next slide -- you can see the curve plotted
from these production records. It starts up here at 55 percent
agent purity at the time of manufacture. You take the 10
percent that was detected during the test, the sample, and you
run the degradation curve on it. At the time of the
demolition, which was in early March, you're a little bit less
than 50 percent. Now, given uncertainties that we have, we go
ahead and use 50 percent as an upper bound for that number.
And we're fairly confident that was about the purity at the
time of detonation. Next slide.
Based on the soldier's descriptions, the rockets were
all, they were facing different directions. This was important
particularly as the soldiers began to describe how they place
the charges. They took the ends off the crates, placed the
charges on the end of the rockets. Some described they always
put it on the warhead; some described that they put it on
either end. One gave a description that he ran out of charges
before he got through half the stacks, so we know that that
description, he was mis-remembering somewhat. But to be fair,
this was six or seven years in the past and was going to be
hard for them to remember that.
The next slide, we did a random distribution for the
Dugway testing of where the charges would go, based on the
soldiers saying that we took the ends off and placed them
around some of the warheads. Next slide. This just shows you
placing of one of the charges by the warhead.
At this point, if we could run the video of Dugway,
what we've, we've got a long time of video on the video tapes.
We've extracted one minute worth of video for you to see some
of the single detonation, some of the multiple stacks. And you
will also note as you look at the video that we've got sensors
in towers and then there's cards placed along the desert floor
to pick up droplets and whatever comes down from the, from the
detonation.
(Video) That was a single rocket there. This is
some of the towers from a different view, the same single
rocket. If I recall that was a stack. Was that a single or a
stack? (Off mike). That was a single again. Here's a stack
of nine. And the next stack you're going to see is a stack of
nineteen. Seen from a further distance; you are able to see
there the cloud going through the sensors that were able to
track the volume of simulated agent, which was tri-ethyl
phosphate. Is that the last one? (Off mike). Now you get an
overhead shot so that you can actually see how much of it
disperses and puddles on the ground and we'll be talking about
those percentages in a moment.
Okay. The next three slides that are also in your
package. This is a photo that one of the soldiers took or had
another soldier take of him standing by a destroyed stack. The
next slide is the same photograph focusing on the crates in the
pit with some enhancement to the photography so you can see
that some of the rockets are still -- some of the crates are
still stacked on top of each other.
The next slide is debris from the test at Dugway. So
-- and we did a lot of comparison of the photographs to make
sure that, yeah, what we were doing was replicating about what
had taken place in the pit. Okay, next slide.
Now, only those rockets that had a charge placed on
them burst to aerosolize the simulant, and that was 2 percent.
Two percent of it aerosolized as vapor in droplets, about 1
percent each. The soldiers were limited in the number of
charges they had; they only had four boxes as best we can
ascertain of charges. At thirty charges a box, that's about
120 charges. Even if you're off by a box, you're ranging from
90 to 150.
One percent of agent, as I said before, went as
aerosol and 1 percent is -- I'm sorry, 1 percent went as vapor,
1 percent as droplets. We were able to calculate that by using
the sensors I described, the cards spread along the desert
floor.
Many of the rockets were not harmed. That is what we
saw occur at Dugway and that's consistent with UNSCOM going in
in October '91 and finding that 750 of what we assessed to be
1,250 fifty, where the Iraqis claim was 1,100, were not harmed,
were not affected by the detonation. So, using our number
which is a greater number in the pit, we get 60 percent were
not, not affected.
Now, 15 percent of the agent then spilled into the
wood and of that, about two thirds evaporated -- I don't have
my, where is it? About two thirds evaporates over the next two
to three days, 15 percent spills into the soil and about one
third of that evaporates. Eight percent burns up on
detonation. You get a higher percentage when you're inside a
building because the buildup of the heat. Next slide.
This next pert -- and you can't read the numbers on
the axis but you can in your package -- on the outside axis is
the percentage of agent and if you total the numbers I gave you
before, you get about 18 percent of the agent that releases.
And this shows the distribution over a number of hours of how
that agent releases until you get to the 18 percent. And it
runs out -- I can't even read that number over there -- is that
about 100 hours? All right, we were running these, we were
running our simulations, our modelings for about 100 hours and
you can see why. By then, the release levels off. Next slide.
This is all that broken down, what I just said, in a
pie chart form which is easier for a lot of us to understand.
I learned once before -- oh, it works over here. Last time at
the Pentagon when I tried to use my red laser it didn't show up
on the dark blue. The, 30 percent of the agent did not
release. Now, what we did was took the number of rockets,
1,250 by the amount of agent per rocket, multiplied all that
out and get 1,882 gallons. That means that a little over 1,100
gallons did not release from the rockets.
UNSCOM took away those 750 rockets and made sure that
they were destroyed after the fact. So they're not still
running around. The other numbers of gallons, the ones I
described before, the 1 percent in vapor, 1 percent is
droplets, that's 19 gallons each. Then you get 108 gallons
that was spilled in soil but later evaporated. You get one 196
gallons spilled in the wood but later evaporated. And the rest
of these is what spilled in soil, wood, and destroyed in the
blast, so it didn't, didn't disperse as part of the plume.
Next slide please.
The last thing I was going to cover was the modeling
effort itself. We used multiple models. The IDA panel had
recommended, given the uncertainties in the meteorological data
and what they described in their paper as uncertainties in the
source term -- but they had not seen the Dugway testing, in
fact we had not even done the Dugway testing when they were
writing the paper -- they were concerned about the source term.
And when we got that information locked down, it wasn't quite
as critical. That said we use two different synoptic
meteorology models, the broad scale meteorological models, to
feed information into where we were going with this.
We used three mesoscale models, MM5 Omega and COAMPS,
that gives us a more localized time of events weather. And
then we linked those in five different ways with three
transportant diffusion models. NUSEE-4 was the model that CIA
had had its contractor use in the past. IDA was very concerned
that we had not linked that. And we had not directly linked
NUSEE to Omega. What we had done, or what our contractor had
done last year was linked Omega, right there, with VLS Track
and then force-fed the information to NUSEE-4. NUSEE-4 at this
point is not linkable.
To do the modeling, the new modeling effort, we used
a SKIPUFF which we linked with all three of the mesoscale. We
used NUSEE-4 which we worked with the Omega and then we used
VLS Track which was linked with COAMPS. Every one of these
produces a different, slightly different plume. That's to be
expected. Every one of these models has strength and all of
them has weaknesses. NUSEE-4, while it's not directly linkable
is one of the only ones that can handle multiple agents. Well,
it had some other, what IDA refers to as significant algorithms
that makes it advantageous to work in this effort. So by
putting these all together -- the next slide please -- we
developed what we call a composite or a union of the various
models.
Now, UNSCOM had indicated that -- not UNSCOM -- IDA
had indicated that we needed to run perpubtions on the weather
because they were very concerned about uncertainties in the
weather and we did that. We ran the weather every which
direction it could go and then we eliminated those -- I've got
down here, runs inconsistent with observed weather patterns
were eliminated -- we eliminated those that just fell outside
observed conditions, the observed conditions being the soot
patterns. We also looked very closely at the smoke from the
oil fires and anything that ran completely inconsistent with
known weather date, we decided was not telling us what actually
happened.
That still left us a number of models to work with.
In fact, we ended up with five linkages that, that could tell
us with fairly good confidence, what we call our best estimate,
of where the plume went. We then drew the outline of that, the
union or composite of those plumes, to increase our confidence
that we'd captured where the plume actually went. And with
that -- I think that's my last slide, correct -- with that I'll
turn it over to Dr. Rostker.
DR. ROSTKER: Before I show you the, the plumes and
the lay down of troops, I want to make a few points on a dosage
curve so that as we go through this you can see what we are
talking about. Next slide please.
What we've illustrated here is a milligram unit per
cubic meter. And we were particularly interested in first
effects and the general population level. Many of you may have
heard me say that Khamissiyah was, for us, an enigma because we
could not understand why we never heard alarms, why we did not
have reports of people complaining about symptoms. And so what
we were particularly interested in is seeing where the exposure
would have been at the first effects level and then out to the
general population level. And we note, as we've said time and
again, that the lack of good research on low-level chemical
exposures, even low-level short duration chemical exposures
measured in hours and not repeated, and that leads us to our
conclusions.
On this chart, at dosage levels are the lethal dosage
and the dosage for incapacitation. Now, with those as
reference points let's take a look at the events at Khamissiyah
as we were able to recalculate them, or understand them. Next
chart.
First let me mention that in October, Department of
Defense identified an area of kilometers that we believed
would contain anyone who had had any first effects and we
surveyed that, that area. There were about 20 troops, we
believed at the time, in that area. That has been taken by the
popular press to be an estimate of who might have been exposed.
That's not, in fact, correct. It was an estimate of people who
may have had first effects and that we were interested in
surveying. In fact, the logic of that exercise was that we
believed we would see first effects in approximately 25
kilometers. We doubled it and because of the uncertainty of
wind patterns, we took a 360 degree circle and we sent
questionnaires to about 20,000 people.
Moreover, I indicated that this was our best
assessment at the time where people were. As we went through
this effort, it became quite clear that we had a quite
imperfect understanding of where the units were. And so for
the units immediately around Khamissiyah, the 18th Airborne
Corps, we started a series of conferences where we brought in
the S-3 and G-3s from those units that had fought there during
the war and recalculated, re-estimated where units were down to
company size units.
For example, in 24th Division we had about 1,100
observations of where a unit was during a, during that period 4
to 15 March. By the time we finished with the S-3 G-3s, we had
almost 12,000 observations. It allowed us to be precise down
to company level rather than having to make estimates at the,
at the battalion level. So we have for the 18th Airborne Corps
a much better understanding of where units were and they are
indicated by the dots on the map.
As we, as we got into this, we found that there were
units of 7th Corps and we still have to do the detailed work on
7th Corps. Some of it was done but some of it is planned for
September. So as we go to the people who may have been exposed
in the 7th Corps area, we probably have an overestimate because
we're working with larger unit aggregations at battalion level
rather than more precise estimates at company level. But that
talks to the 50 kilometers and the 20,000 people. And let's
take a look at where the actual plume was as we can best
reconstruct it through the efforts that we've talked about.
This is a blow-up of the immediate area around
Khamissiyah and we're looking at the units. The maroon area is
the area of first effects. You'll notice that it has a long
area and then a, a tail. That tail represents one of the five
runs and we included it in the union technique. It's not that
the wind was actually shifting.
Let me blow, let me blow this up a little more to
actually get to Khamissiyah and you'll see here the familiar
highway that ran through Khamissiyah. The people that placed
the charges were actually moved past the edge of the map, along
the highway. And you see a smaller area in which we believe
our chemical alarms would have sounded and here's a measuring
difference. Most of what we're talking about in terms of the
plumes are in terms of dosage. Our chemical alarms are not in
terms of dosage, they're in terms of instantaneous
concentration and they recycle every 20 seconds. So we have a
different scale here in terms of concentration over time
equaling doses versus instantaneous concentration.
And this map goes a long way to explain the enigma of
Khamissiyah, why didn't we hear alarms and why didn't we see
people indicating to us that they were, they were sick. And
the answer is that, as best we can tell from our unit locations
and here we're at company-level units, the plume, the cloud did
not go over any units. Moreover, the area that we would have
had sufficient concentration to hear alarms, there were no
units nearby and it's an area of just a few kilometers by a few
kilometers. That's and indication also in terms of
instantaneous, of where we would have required people to
immediately go into MOPP because of the imminent threat of, of
death. Next slide please.
On the second day, we see again an area of first
effects. We know of no one who went back into the Khamissiyah
area and we do not know of anybody who, who would have had
first effects at that point in, in time. And then on the third
day -- and I should say each day the units moved because we
have different unit locations -- and on the third day, we do
not believe there was sufficient concentration that would have
resulted in anyone having any symptoms. The third day is
significant because it was on the third day that the pictures
were taken that Bob showed you of a trooper standing by the
blown-up boxes. And again, we couldn't understand why three
days into the event there would have been no impact when we
knew things got into the soil and wood, and our work at
Edgewood indicates that by the third day we would have had all
the evaporation would have come out and we would not have
expected to see first effects.
Now we have, I mentioned, I mentioned that we had
surveyed 20,000 people around Khamissiyah and I want to share
with you just some of the, the results of this survey. We were
looking for anybody in our original database that was there
between 4 and 15 March, those were bracketed by the bunker
explosion and what we thought might be a period after an event
as late as the 12th of March. We sent out almost 20,000
questionnaires. We sent it out in several waves and
eventually ended up with about 74,000 responses.
One of the questions, question six, asks whether the
individual knew anyone or themselves had felt anything
medically out of, out of the ordinary during that period of
time. And we had about 300 or so responses. We, we tried to
contact every single one. We made at lease a phone call to
contact every single one on the list and accomplished over 200
contacts, and were able to sort out from the discussion of who
might have felt an exposure. We end, we're left with 90 -- or
we've concluded that 99.5 percent of the troops within 50
kilometers of Khamissiyah in that period of time did not feel
anything out of the ordinary. That's quite consistent with the
analysis we did which showed that no troops were under the
plume.
We do carry 26 veterans who had symptoms that could
be consistent with an exposure to a, an agent and that would be
wheezing, diarrhea, tightness in the chest. It's also
consistent with other, with other medical conditions. And we
are in the process of correlating their experience with the
CCEP and VA registries, with their presence on the, on the
battlefield and with their exposures. And we have encouraged
all of them who have not registered to go back and register.
Remember, we've talked to all of these, all of these
people. You know, we can, we can focus on the 26 but I think
the important thing is the 99.5 percent of the 7,000 who gave
no indication. And again, that being consistent with, with the
analysis that we had done. Next slide please.
We're now going to look at the general population
limits. At the far extreme, of course, we have the CDC's
statement of exposure. This is the 72 hour limit; we've
translated that 72 hour limit into a milligram minute. At the
other extreme are the, are the immediate effects. We call this
area, for notification purposes, the area of low-level
exposure. And we are notifying everyone in that area and it is
the subject of ongoing medical research. Next slide.
The light purple area is the projection as, as we've
been able to make for the first day, it's actually a little
less than a day. It goes from the explosion to about three
o'clock, three o'clock in the morning and consistent with the
wind patterns. Next slide please.
The second day, the wind shifts to the -- from the
east, starts blowing from the east to the west and the plume is
pushed towards the west. This is an interesting plume because
it is not an instantaneous release and then you watch the cloud
go down, down range. This cloud is being constantly fed,
substantially fed by the evaporation from the wood and from the
sand. And you see it moves substantially into Saudi Arabia,
crosses the tap line road and captures KKMC.
The next day, the wind shifts again. The plume is
continually being fed and it moves up the Euphrates Valley.
And on the fourth day, which is the last day there was any
release as best we can tell, the plume is in the immediate
vicinity of Khamissiyah but again, not at a level that would
indicate that anyone would have realized they were being
exposed to low-level chemical agents. Next slide please.
We have made a count based upon the location of our
units and then netted out for double counting. On the first
day the winds were blowing almost due south and we believe no
one was exposed to first notable effects, at least based upon
unit location. We can't be sure for every single individual
but that some 19,000, almost 19,000 troops may have been
exposed to low-level chemicals.
On the 11th, the wind was blowing from east to west,
thickening the cloud, moving it along the border, and that is
the day when 79,000 troops may have been exposed. The third
day along the, cloud is moving along the Euphrates Valley, an
additional 32,000 and then on the forth day we had two
battalions back in the Khamissiyah area and that resulted in
the potential exposure to 16,000 troops. Netting out the
doubles, we have almost 99,000.
Now for epidemiological work we will be able to
provide detailed time dosage or dosage patterns, concentration
over time, dosage being the integral of that curve, and we'd be
able to provide that for any unit that, or any individual that
based on the unit location becomes the subject for further
medical or epidemiological research. Next slide please.
We were very concerned in, in notifying our, our
veterans, we have, are in the process of sending letters to
anyone who may have been under the plume as well as anyone who
had any contact with our office and indicated any concern about
the events in Khamissiyah. And that includes all of the people
in the 20,000 who got a survey and we will then write them,
every one of them, whether or not they may have been exposed or
were not exposed. We bolstered our 800 contact effort -- next
slide please -- and I'll show you what we've done there.
We have 20 operators operating or receiving calls in
Monterey and we dispatched our veterans' contact manager who
supervised that activity. I can tell you that on Friday we had
90 phone calls concerning health and indicating people wanted
to register with the CCEP and that is about double of what we
would normally expect. And yesterday, we had 210 phone calls.
This is, while, while it's increased, it is less of an
increase, frankly, than we thought we would see and less of an
increase than we had when we sent out the initial notifications
in, in October that people, concerning concerns about
Khamissiyah that people would be surveyed. So we are able to
stay on top of this.
And then we have backup here, or in Washington for
the more difficult cases. We're prepared to provide follow-up
care as is the VA in meeting all of their demands. There are
things that we have yet to do. I indicate that, indicated that
we can provide a more precise estimate for those units in the
7th Corps and we will be doing those S-3 - G-3 conferences in
September based upon the work with 18th Airborne Corps, the
number should probably come down rather than go up since we'll
be able to create the database at the company rather than the
battalion level. And as I indicated in my opening remarks,
this is really critical for ongoing or new epidemiological
work, having for the first time a, a precise estimate of what
people may actually have been exposed to, given the Khamissiyah
incident. Next slide please.
Let me leave you with three important messages. We
know of no units that were close enough to experience any
noticeable health effects. And that really helps us understand
Khamissiyah and answer the questions of how did we, how did we
miss it if this was an event of the size we were depicting, why
didn't we see sick people, why didn't we hear alarms. We do
recognize that many soldiers were exposed to low levels of
chemical agent, sufficiently low that they would not have
realized they had been exposed. And this has to be the subject
of continued medical research.
And then most importantly, if anyone in this
population or any of our Gulf veterans have any concern for
their health, we encourage them to register with the CCEP or
the VA health registry. And these are the telephone numbers
that they can reach us and we can provide assistance in
arranging for those health, health check-ups and evaluations.
With that I'd be pleased to take any questions that you have.
MR. RIOS: Had you done any analysis on what, what did
we lose in doing the modeling say in 1997 instead of having
done the modeling say, in 1993? What, what was the impact of,
or what has been the impact on your modeling and your results
had we had this done five years ago instead of having it done
now --
DR. ROSTKER: Well --
MR. RIOS: -- because preparing your modeling is a
function of data or information that you have before you and it
seems to me that we lost a lot in having done it five years
after the fact.
DR. ROSTKER: I think the only thing we've lost five
years after the fact was the recollections of those who placed
the demolitions in the pit. We still -- the actual
demonstrations at Dugway and the like were extremely important
and would have had to have been done then as they were done now
because we did not appreciate the extent to which the dynamics
of those explosions would dominate the calculations. Our
earlier considerations were things like 100 percent
aerolization. We now know that that's not wrong. That is,
would have been a fact three years ago or five years ago as it
is a fact today. So the only thing that was really time-specific
in this is any change in the memory of the five
soldiers we were able to identify, in terms of what they did
and how they placed stuff in the pit. I'm, I might -- the
colonel headed the field activity at Dugway and I might as you
to comment on that, Larry.
COL. CEREGHINO: I think my work is well-reflected
in what Mr. Walpole has presented --
MR. RIOS: Well, if that is true, have you done any
analysis on -- well, what if, what if the recollection was of
the people that placed these, these what do you call them, the
charges. Any parameters as to whether if they had recalled and
said this is where we placed them versus this is where we --
this is how much, how much we placed there and so on. What,
what are, what are the consequences of that inaccuracy so far
as this whole modeling business.
COL. CEREGHINO: We, we can not and will not be
able to overestimate the value of the veterans explaining what
they did because we just don't have records on, on exactly what
they did. And last year when we were trying to sort this out,
we only had two veterans talking. When we got five of them
together in a room it was amazing what that did to their
memories and the way it brought their memories out. We were
talking to one of them and trying to get him to recall some
others that had worked on it. And we got two of them together
and one said, well I remember one guy that was doing some art
work on my helmet. The other one said oh, he's so and so. He
was in my unit.
So we, I called Bernie. They called me from where
they were interviewing him, called Bernie that afternoon, that
was a Friday as I recall and Monday morning they had found the
guy. And that was when we got all of them together and their
memories started to, to really gel.
So yeah, there's a lot lost in time. I think getting
them together and having them recall what had happened, doing
the artist's rendering as we described to help them remember
that, the photographs, we brought all the photographs, you
know, to bear on this but there, I don't, I'm not sure there's
a way to calculate, you know, the degree of what was lost.
We've done everything possible in the modeling to the point of,
of ascertaining, as I said before, that the rockets were facing
different directions, modeling various approaches for that and
modeling various random placings, of the charges, having the
soldiers say yeah this is, this is more like how we place it.
That, that's the best we can do.
DR. NISHIMI: What would be a fair assessment of
say, (off mike), that we would have four years of research on a
relatively well-defined (off mike) --
COL. CEREGHINO: You're talking about
epidemiological data.
DR. NISHIMI: Yes.
COL. CEREGHINO: Different question.
DR. ROSTKER: No body, no --
DR. NISHIMI: That's what was lost.
DR. ROSTKER: Yeah. Nobody cries more than I do
that the time lost. It was unfortunate. You know that we've
laid out the history of the realizations of Khamissiyah in, in
two papers: the Khamissiyah Narrative that my office produced
and the, and the, I think, outstanding paper the CIA produced.
It, it was unfortunate that we did not recognize
these leads in 1992 and I think we would have all had a better
picture and, and understand more then than we, than we did the
possibility of low-level chemicals. I can only tell you that,
that as the President instructed us to leave no stone unturned
we've literally left no stone unturned from manufacturing the
warheads, from getting sand from southern, southern Iraq, to
manufacturing the wooden cases.
There were a lot of theories about what would have
happened from the metal, from the cases driving into the
warheads, setting them off. And after you get through this,
things that should have, you should have understood become much
clearer. In bunker 73 there are a lot of shell fragments where
the plastic is broken you can see the burster tubes where the
charges were through the middle of that and it, it's obvious
that they cracked and leaked into the soil because if they had
broken to aerosolize we wouldn't be looking at large pieces of
plastic. We would have seen the destruction of a warhead. The
fact that these warheads were not fused meant that they were
either consumed in the actual explosion or they broke open and
leaked or they stayed intact and UNSCOM hauled them away.
MR. RIOS: Let me ask you just as a follow-up on this,
would it be a, I mean, is it possible that say had we gotten
those five troops together in 1993, is it possible it could
give you, it could have given you a set of facts or a
recollection that presented a set of facts that would make this
modeling today totally inaccurate or irrelevant?
DR. ROSTKER: I don't believe so.
MR. RIOS: All right -- pardon me?
DR. ROSTKER: I don't believe so.
MR. RIOS: So that's highly unlikely.
DR. ROSTKER: Yes, sir.
MR. RIOS: The best you can say is that's highly
unlikely.
DR. ROSTKER: Because a great deal of the analysis
that followed was based upon the physics of the demolitions,
not on their recollections. And their recollections are very
strong on key issues like how they placed the charges. So, I
don't think that having done this earlier would have much of an
impact on the particular reconstructions and simulations that
we have been able to do.
MR. WALPOLE: That's right. And they were severely
limited in what they had to work with. They -- I have
indicated in my opening remarks they had four boxes of charges.
They were out of detonation cord. They were using Czech
detonation cord to pull off this demolition. They readily
admitted that they did not have enough material to destroy
these rockets completely.
DR. ROSTKER: I, I should say --
DR. LASHOF: May I ask why?
DR. ROSTKER: Sorry, ma'am.
DR. LASHOF: I -- that's a surprising statement
that we had a group going in to do demolition and they didn't
have adequate --
DR. ROSTKER: We were, we were --
DR. LASHOF: -- charges to --
DR. ROSTKER: -- totally overwhelmed by the extent
to which this unit at this place and other units at other
ammunition places were called upon to blow up ammunition that
Saddam Hussein had there. It was overwhelming.
We have a CNN tape about, I guess, 30 miles away on
the next day going through the same kind of think. It's a
funny tape because in the middle of the -- we identified the
attack unit and in our de-briefs of the crew that were there,
the soldiers that were there, they said, and as we were going
through there CNN arrives and we have the CNN crew actually
arriving talking to the same guy that we had in our field, in
our lead sheets. But they were faced with the same thing,
trying to blow up a massive amount. We just weren't prepared
for it. And the experience at Dugway will serve us extremely
well in understanding the issue of field expediency and open-pit
demolitions and how we have to handle a situation in the
future. We never had that kind of situation model before and,
and the procedures we had were completely different from the
field reality that existed there.
MR. WALPOLE: If you turn to the second map in my
package you'll see there's, there's three sites there. In
fact, we can pull that one up. There's the bunker 73 and
that's what they thought they were going to be destroying with
the bunkers. That's up here and all these are bunkers, that's
right. Down here is the pit, that's what we've just been
discussing. And then over here is the 155 mm. mustard rounds
that Mr. Duelfer mentioned this morning which they didn't find.
They were declared later and hauled away and destroyed. They
found the, the ones down in the pit as they were driving along
the road by the canal there and saw a piece of canvas flapping
in the breeze and thought, gee that looks strange, because
there was dirt on top of the canvas and it was kind of hidden.
So I, the site was large and if they thought they were only
going after the bunkers, that would explain why they didn't
have enough charges to do three piles let alone two.
MR. RIOS: Let me -- one more question and then I'll
pass it on to somebody else. Several times it has been
mentioned by both of you that we're trying to find out why we
didn't get more alarms. Why didn't people complain at that
time when it was occurring. It is possible that, that you
didn't get more notice or more alarms going off or more
complaints, is it possible that, that could be explained by the
exposures possibly being below the levels of the equipment that
was there? The detection levels of the equipment number one
and number two is it possible that they were exposed to the
levels that aren't, aren't, you don't have symptoms right away
but you could have over the long haul.
DR. ROSTKER: Well, that's exactly the point. On,
on the, on the alarms you're exactly right. The alarms were
set to a certain tolerance. The, the M8 alarms and they, the
area that the alarms would have gone off, given the amount of
material that went into the air was much smaller, we had no
troops, we had no alarms there.
MR. RIOS: And the symptoms could have been, I mean,
the troops could have had symptoms to the exposure but they
could be the type of symptoms that don't come -- manifest
themselves until after a long period of time.
DR. ROSTKER: That's why --
MR. RIOS: That could be the answer to that question.
DR. ROSTKER: Absolutely. And that's why we are
looking at the issue of low-level chemical exposure. We do
know, we have now 7,000 responses and we're questioning 26.
That's less that a half of 1 percent. We've talked to all of
the medics in the, in the units. People did not present
themselves. Even the 26, many of them did not present
themselves at the time and some of these characteristics could
well have been confused with flue and other symptoms.
Pieces are really, for us at least, coming in to play
here. We're much more confident, for example, to say yes,
chemicals were destroyed at Khamissiyah. It has always been a
hesitant -- a hesitation on our part because we couldn't
understand the alarms and the sickness. This just -- it all
falls in, into place: the survey results, the modeling results.
It's a nice, it's a much neater package than it was six months
ago for us.
MR. WALPOLE: If I could add just briefly too.
There are a lot of spinoff values to the modeling that was done
and one is this issue of alarms. One of the warnings CIA had
sent before the pit had been destroyed was that the munitions
would not be marked. Our forces are going to go into countries
in years to come where such munitions may not be marked. And
this modeling has shown us what the alarms will and will not do
and yet where the plume will go and we may need to design, as a
government, an alarm that can be placed downwind of a
demolition like this so that if it goes off, other precautions
can be taken. Because you're not going to always know what
munitions are there particularly if they're, you're, they're
doing something as quickly as they're doing here where they
were moving out fairly quickly and certainly couldn't go
through every one of the bunkers. The bunkers themselves were
booby trapped and they couldn't even get into them.
DR. LASHOF: Let me follow up on some of these
questions that we've just had, if I may. You mentioned the
26th, that say they had symptom that came out of the survey.
Do you know where they were located in relation to the plume
now? Were they within the 50, were they down, way downwind?
DR. ROSTKER: We know where some of them were. The
problem is on some of the units we have two locations and
that's because the units were moving. And I don't know how to
sort that out yet and so we need to do a little bit more work.
I can tell you that of the 26, 14 are in either the VA or DOD
registries. I can tell you that of the 26, they were in 23
separate units, that if you look at the unit population, what
we're talking about no more than 1.4 percent of a unit having
somebody report sick.
So we're back to that interesting problem of people
who may be, if you accept all of them are sick from chemicals,
you're talking about a reaction that 1 percent of a unit got
and 99 percent of the unit did not get. So, we're in that very
difficult area where people may have some predisposition, may
have some reaction but it's not a reaction that's going to be
shared by the vast majority of people in the unit.
DR. LASHOF: Or the 26 may have had something else.
DR. ROSTKER: Or the 26, given the benefit of the
doubt. But the 26 are still reporting, most of them are still
reporting symptoms that we would recognize and we will do in
the months ahead much further epidemiological work. In fact,
there's a conference with the VA on Wednesday on the, on the
results of this as it impacts on epidemiology and that goes
everything from the quite imprecise participation rates down to
specific diagnoses.
But again, for the first time we have a fair
confidence. These, this union footprint though is larger, you
appreciate, than any single model and we can be more precise
when we get into the models and, and have better, even
estimates for what the exposures may or may not have been.
DR. LASHOF: Let me ask a couple more, if you will
about the potential for epidemiology. I mean, this is the most
exciting data we've had to deal with this on the potential that
it could give us a handle. But let me get back to the, some of
the data you gave us on your preliminary -- on your survey of
the 50 kilometer radius and then 19,000 surveys went out and
the 7,000 returned. And then you say you did the telephone
survey follow-up and 99 percent recall no symptom.
Now, is the telephone survey follow-up on the 7,000
that were returned or did it include the 19,000? What do we
know of the 7,000 versus the 19,000?
DR. ROSTKER: It was question number six which asks
did you or did you see anybody who had a health effect, or knew
anybody. And again, we're not being precise because it's that
whole time frame. We had, I believe, 341 responses out of the
7,000. We tried to contact every one of them. We've
accomplished about 200 or so completed phone calls. So the 26
are of the 250 some odd that we have actually talked to. And
we've been able to ascertain -- most of them said well, I
wasn't sick but I remember somebody being sick. So we
eliminated that since everybody had an opportunity to respond
to the questionnaire. So the 26 are people who had symptoms
that related -- we can't rule out but they're spread under and
not under the plume. They're spread in no concentration.
Typically of the company size units, we're talking about 200
people and the most we had was two out of 200 and generally
it's one out of two hundred across the board. So there's, we
were looking for concentrations. We just could not, could not
find it.
MAJ CROSS: The 26, are they -- what was the
breakdown? On active duty still?
DR. ROSTKER: They're all active duty because these
were all active duty forces that were around Khammis --
effectively all active duty forces around Khamissiyah.
Remember, this is not the universe in, in Iraq. This was
people who were between the 4th and the 15th whose unit was in,
with 50 kilometers of Khamissiyah. So that would have been the
7th, the 18th Airborne Corps --
MAJ CROSS: Today, of those 26, are all 26 still
on active duty?
DR. ROSTKE: No. No.
MAJ CROSS: That's my question.
DR. ROSTKER: No.
MAJ CROSS: Do you know what the breakdown is?
DR. ROSTKER: I don't -- yes. I mean, I have, I
have a description of every one of the 26. I, we, for privacy
reasons can't be made public but we'll be happy to share it in
detail with the, with the committee.
MAJ CROSS: Because I, I, you know, I just want to
caution -- we've heard it this morning -- I sense there's still
individuals on active duty who won't come forward even though
this is to the benefit of all of us but they won't come forward
--
DR. ROSTKER: We understand that.
MAJ CROSS: -- you know, because of retribution, a
fear of retribution.
DR. ROSTKER: Well, they, they --
MAJ CROSS: It's slanted in one respect --
DR. ROSTKER: No question about it. That goes to
the issue of self, self selection but many of our
epidemiological work points out to large numbers of veterans.
For example, some work that was done at San Diego with the
Naval Research Center with Seabees had, they recorded for me
how -- I asked how many Seabees that had been deployed had
five, had symptoms and they gave me a count of five or more
symptoms of 100 out of about 600 that had been deployed and
only 12 had actually come into the registry. The others had,
had symptoms had complaints but had not come into the registry.
So I'm very, you know, and in these 26, only 14 have come into
the registries.
But again, I think the important thing is, is not to
dwell on the 26. We will as individuals to make sure they're
getting the care they need but the 26 are the residual of 99.5
percent and we're using it as a check on the analysis. I mean,
the analysis would be questionable if we had large numbers of
people on the survey who said that they were sick and we were
showing none of them were under the plume. That's not the case
here. So it's a, it's a common sense check as well as the
whole survey which was an attempt to gain insight as to what
might, might learn from people around Khamissiyah. Seven
thousand is not a particularly good response rate but, but I'm
sure people who didn't see or want to communicate with us or --
would be in the, in the residual 13,000 who never responded.
So I think we probably -- that the non-response bias is
probably in favor of those who felt they wanted to talk to us
about something they saw at Khamissiyah.
DR. LASHOF: Well, I was going to ask about the
non-response bias and the fact that of the 19,000 you only got
7,000 returned. Did you make any effort to take a sample of
those who didn't return and try to reach them by phone and get
any information --
DR. ROSTKER: Just, just in terms of --
DR. LASHOF: -- just to see how they resemble the
others?
DR. ROSTKER: We just did one re-mailing. This was
not set out to be a great big scientific survey. We were
looking for patterns. We were looking for insights and
frankly, potential contacts. What we, we considered this a
screening survey to identify contacts for phone work, not to do
statistical work in terms of representing population. It
happened that it was a useful check in terms of the analytic
work but I wouldn't put more into it than, than a common sense
check rather than a, a detailed statistical analysis.
DR. LASHOF: Well, you said you're going to be
meeting with the VA and reviewing all this in terms of what
further epidemiology --
DR. ROSTKER: Yes, ma'am.
DR. LASHOF: -- can be done and obviously we'll
have a, we have a September meeting and I'm sure we're going to
be anxious --
DR. ROSTKER: Yes, ma'am.
DR. LASHOF: -- to know what epidemiologic studies
are going to be done, what we're going to be able to do from
the VA's 15,000 survey. Hopefully we will be able to get a
handle on which of those were really in this and whether you've
got a big enough sample --
DR. ROSTKER: I wish this Khamissiyah work was a,
was a panacea for the veterans that are ill.
DR. LASHOF: Yeah.
DR. ROSTKER: But it isn't. It does give us a first
real agreement on an exposure that is, as you said, very
exciting for the potential for additional follow-on research.
DR. LASHOF: In, in relation to that and what it
means to the veterans and so on, obviously once Khamissiyah
came upon the scene and was written up in the press, everybody
jumped that chemical agents were the cause of the problem and
so forth. What do you intend to do to notify others who might
have felt they were near Khamissiyah, not within the 20,000
whom you said you were going to notify them whether they were
or they weren't? How big are you going to draw that circle to
get out to people to say look , we've modeled the plume and we
know you were generally in the general vicinity but don't
worry, you weren't there?
DR. NISHIMI: I'm going to have Dr. Rostker's
assistant throw up the day two plume, the one that you're
referring to. No. Day two of the low-level.
DR. ROSTKER: The low level. This has been a
discussion with, within the government and frankly, we have had
conflicting recommendations from risk communicators. One
school of thought is that we should throw the net as wide as
possible and another school of thought says that we'll be
scaring people and frankly, we have not come to a conclusion.
We did get one response, telephone response where the woman
said, every time you send a letter you scare my husband, even
though the letter was no, and please take us off the mailing
list and don't write us any more. That's, that represents one
viewpoint. Right now the immediate decision and where we are
logistically is the, the notice to the hundred thousand plus
anybody else who has, we have contacted before or has expressed
an interest in Khamissiyah. But we're prepared to discuss that
point, certainly.
DR. NISHIMI: I think the committee's interest is
that you've got this low-level plume going out about 300 miles
on, you have a lot of people who are actually quite close in
and it would be beneficial to inform these people that they
were not under the plume. I actually talked to two different
experts in risk communication on Friday, one from the private
sector and another that worked with another federal agency and
their opinion was that on this particular issue, Khamissiyah,
you can not over-communicate at this point, as long as you
communicate properly. So, so I offer that perspective.
DR. ROSTKER: Well, I'm --
DR. NISHIMI: Can you give us some sense if you draw
that circle 300 miles about how many troops are in there?
About twice as much it looks like, two and one half times
maybe?
DR. ROSTKER: About 270,000.
DR. NISHIMI: And so that would involve notifying
about 170, 175,000 additional people.
DR. ROSTKER: That's right.
DR. NISHIMI: Is that correct? And is it your sense
that that's the way the Department of Defense is committed to
proceed?
DR. ROSTKER: Well it isn't, it's not right now but
we certainly can, can discuss that. I can carry the view back
to the department. I do not have in my budget, immediately,
the funds necessary to do that but I'm sure those can be made
available and I will carry that message back to the department
and let you know. It will probably be about two weeks before
we can do it. We need to get the first mailings out but then I
think we can go ahead and do what you've suggested.
DR. LASHOF: My own sense of mis-communication and
playing with this is also that this would make sense. And
there may be the occasional person who -- well they'll just say
anything when he gets upset but -- I would think a well-written
letter that explains that we really do have some solid
information about where the plume went, where it was and that
you weren't there could be reassuring to an awful lot of people
and --
DR. ROSTKER: We have shared with the staff the two
letters, the notification and the other letter. The second
letter has been coordinated throughout the government and I'm
sure we can send that to a larger group. I'm very sympathetic
to your request and I'm sure we can, we can accomplish it.
DR. NISHIMI: Are you going to be in contact with
other coalition partners?
DR. ROSTKER: Yes, ma'am. In fact, we will be
visiting the British, French and Czechoslovakians -- excuse me,
Czech Rep -- Czech -- in September and in October Kuwait,
Egypt, Saudi Arabia and also Israel. And this will be part of
the -- we will be making presentations in each one of those --
DR. NISHIMI: Are you aware at this time whether any
of them --
DR. ROSTKER: Yes.
DR. NISHIMI: -- were under the first effects plume?
DR. ROSTKER: We, we believe there may be a small
number of British troops based upon maps that they have
subsequently sent to us. We shared this with the British
immediately on last Thursday and we believe there may be some
Syrian and Egyptian troops that were in the 7th Corps area.
DR. NISHIMI: Under the first effects?
MR. WALPOLE: No, not under the first effects.
DR. ROSTKER: No. Nothing, nobody under first
effects.
DR. NISHIMI: Okay.
DR. LASHOF: Other questions?
DR. PORTER: I'd like to actually go back to a
question Mr. Rios asked earlier to clarify my understanding of
what alarms do and what they don't do. Could you put up slide
number five which is the blow-up of day one?
MAJ KNOX: Day one first effects, right?
DR. PORTER: Threshold effects.
DR. ROSTKER: It's the blow-up of Khamissiyah with
highway eight and it has the small alarm area as well as the --
DR. PORTER: The big pink area.
DR. ROSTKER: -- the area of first effects, area.
Nope. Next one.
DR. PORTER: Am I to understand correctly that the
alarms will sound only in the small area shown and that at the
point at which the first health effects are experienced, as
shown on the depiction --
DR. ROSTKER: Yes, that's right.
DR. PORTER: -- the alarms will not sound?
DR. ROSTKER: Yes. And, and the reason is there's a
different scale here and that is, one is a dosage scale in
which we're talking about exposure over time and cumulative,
and the other is an instantaneous. So, if you can think of --
do we have a exposure, Larry? Let me show you what a, what a
pattern might look like --
MAJ CROSS: When you spoke to these five
individuals did they -- did you talk to them whether or not
they had alarms --
DR. ROSTKER: Yes.
MAJ CROSS: -- turned on, turned off? What was
their recollection? Do you remember?
DR. ROSTKER: Larry, do you remember the five
individuals whether they talked about alarms being at the pit.
COL. CEREGHINO: (Off mike)
DR. ROSTKER: But they were, again, they were not
there during the demolition.
COL. CEREGHINO: They were outside that area.
DR. PORTER: Right. I understand that but what I'm
--
DR. ROSTKER: Let, let me. I think I can answer
your question. The, the, the issue of first effects is an
issue of dosage and what you have in dosage is the grey area
here and you can gain the dosage either by cumulative over time
or by amplitude in this curve by having a great concentration
all of a sudden. The chemical alarm works on concentration,
okay? And the area of first effects is an area of dosage so
that we are not looking at the same time scale when we go to
the previous example. So, in this particular case you might
have a dose -- you might have the alarm going off at this
point, and that would before somebody felt it because they
hadn't accumulated enough dosage to have a, a first effect.
I, I'm not a physicist or a physician and we
struggled how do we make that intuitively clear and it is
difficult and it really has to come back to curves that look
like this and it's the difference between the instantaneous
concentration that the alarm would detect, recycling every
twenty seconds, and the area of dosage which is cumulative
over, over time.
DR. PORTER: I understand that but I do think that
the depiction is confusing because it implies to people that
they're going to be exposed to something at a level at which
there would be low-level health effects and that the alarms
will never sound to protect them. That's the implication and
that's why I question how it was depicted on the chart.
DR. ROSTKER: It's again, it's a, our alarms are not
dosage alarms, they are instantaneous. They are alarms based
upon concentration.
MR. TURNER: Just to clarify Dr. Rostker, if I
understand what you're saying it is if you have a low level
exposure for a long period of time you may encounter first
health effect even though an alarm would not go off --
DR. ROSTKER: That's my understanding.
MR. TURNER: -- scenario.
DR. ROSTKER: That is -- that's my understanding.
Is that right guys?
(Off mike)
DR. NISHIMI: Please come to the mike.
MR. BARBARSKY: (Off mike) the dosage accumulated over
24 hours so it would, you know, it's questionable and Jack
probably should --
DR. NISHIMI: Please come to the mike.
MR. BARBARSKY: Come up here Jack.
DR. LASHOF: Yeah, let's get everybody into this
because this is an important and confusing issue.
JACK HELLER: I'm, I'm Jack Heller, US Army Center
for Health Promotion and Preventive Medicine. Okay, that first
slide Col. Cereghino had was of a -- put, just put the first
one up real quick for a second -- the alarm goes of at, I
believe, point two milligrams per cubic meter and you can see
we never did reach that dose. This unit, we wanted to see what
someone getting an acute exposure would look like. There was
no unit in the first effect zone but we put this unit five
kilometers from the Khamissiyah pit --
MR. BARBARSKY: It's actually not that one, it's the
next one, isn't it?
JACK HELLER: No that, that was the one we, I
believe, was the --
MR. BARBARSKY: That's it.
JACK HELLER: Oh okay. I'm sorry, you're right.
This is the one that was five kilometers from the Khamissiyah
pit. And potentially someone could get runny nose or rhinitis
from this kind of exposure and the alarm would never go off
because the concentration was never high enough
instantaneously.
The way the model worked is an accumulated dose over
time so that first day you saw the, about eighteen kilometer
first effect zone, that was the one milligram minute per cubic
meter zone and that was accumulated over an eight hour period.
Now, that had been gotten over a ten or twenty minute period,
the way chemical agent works, they probably would have gotten a
runny nose or myosis. But since, the way the model works, to
make it very conservative and make a very conservative acute
zone, it just kept accumulating dosage over that, that whole
eight hour period. So they probably never got an instantaneous
dose that was high enough to cause that acute effect.
One of the things with chemical agent that's
important is, the time span you get that concentration at. So
if they'd have gotten that whole dose, that one milligram
minute per cubic meter maybe over a ten, twenty, thirty minute
period, they might have gotten a runny nose and a myosis. But
since that dose, the way the model works, accumulated over a
very long period of time, they probably would not have
experienced first effects, even though we're calling it a first
effect zone, to be very, very careful.
We wanted to be very careful that we absolutely got
anyone who might have had a first effect zone. So for each
period, the next day it was 24 hour period when we were
accumulating that, that same first effect zone and clearly, you
know, no one was in it but they would have had to have gotten
that dose over, over a much shorter period than we're showing
there.
DR. ROSTKER: The insert chart at the bottom is a
unit placed in the general -- between first effects and general
population and you can see the difference in the dosage in the
scale. We're talking about the thickening of the axis. So
when we talk about low level, we're talking about low level
that is basically off the chart in terms of the exposures.
JACK HELLER: And you can see that is still over a
very long period of time when they, when they got that, that
low level. And still, this is over, this is over a period of
time of about six hours when they got that dose. As I said, if
they would have gotten it over ten, twenty minutes, they might
have gotten that first effect --
MAJ KNOX: That was hypothetical, that first one.
JACK HELLER: Yes because there was no --
MAJ KNOX: I wanted to make that clear.
DR. ROSTKER: This was an artifact to be able to --
JACK HELLER: Right.
DR. ROSTKER: -- to answer the question.
JACK HELLER: Right. We wanted to put a unit within
five K of the pit just to see what his dosage profile would
look like and see if he ever got a high enough dose over a
short enough period to potentially have caused that, you know,
that acute, that acute effect. So we're fairly comfortable
with the way the acute zone was portrayed. It was a very
conservative first effect zone.
DR. LASHOF: What does this tell us in relation to
everything we've heard all along about alarms going off
frequently and being false alarms and that the alarm was
extremely sensitive versus the fact that it could have been low
level at this level floating around other places and no alarm
going off?
DR. ROSTKER: Well, that's the, the issue of the
alarms --
DR. LASHOF: What are the implications of all of
this?
DR. ROSTKER: The issue of the alarms are certainly
the issue of our repeated case narratives and we'll talk about
that later. But our, our general assessment on the M8 alarms
are that they were prone to false alarms because of a variety
of, of problems. And again, if you were to see a concentration
high enough to set the alarm off, and that gets towards the
issue of death and incapacitation, you should have seen first
effects because you would have been so high on that curve that
you would have gotten a dosage almost instantaneously to, to
kill you.
So I think the theory of the alarms are correct in
the sense of where the alarms are set and the protection they
provide the troops. As we've been able to portray it over
time, we have a very conservative estimate. If you were to ask
me are we sure we captured everybody who may have had a
low-level dosage, the answer is absolutely yes. If you were to
ask, are there people that we are saying had a low-level dosage
that might not have been exposed at all, the answer is also
yes. We clearly are erroring on the side of making sure we've
captured everyone that possibly could have been exposed.
DR. PORTER: I understand that now. I think it's a
complicated risk communication issue, however.
MR. WALPOLE: One of the things to point out too is
that while we portray this as colors on a map, the researchers,
those that will be doing the epidemiological research, as well
as those that will be looking into the alarm issue are going to
get contours with numbers. And all of this is going to be
numerically portrayed and they'll be able to make a lot more
sense of it in dosage and concentration, all of the above, to
sort out these questions. Colors don't lend themselves to
that.
DR. ROSTKER: We still have the imprecision of, of
our best estimate of where a person was is where the commanders
say his unit was. And one of the things that we have to come
to grips with in the future is how do we do better in actually
monitoring the location of individuals as distinct from units.
MR. TURNER: Could I just ask a question about
alarms? Given the levels that you've portrayed in your
modeling and the limitations you've described in the M8, are
you suggesting there ought to be a lower level real time
chemical detector or is DOD still insisting that the M8 level
is adequate?
DR. ROSTKER: I think the M8 level is, is fine for
incapacitation and, and death. There is an issue of, of
monitoring low-level chemicals. That's why we're very
interested, Mr. Turner, in the Czech detections because they
were very sophisticated. They were more sensitive than the 256
kits. And if truly we only had two days of Czech detections,
then that tells us something about the potential of low-level
chemical exposure. If the Czech's detectors were on as we
believe and they never went off except for those two days, it
gives us another day to point, address the question of whether
the battlefield was saturated with low-level chemicals.
MR. TURNER: But you don't think US forces should
have a similar capability?
DR. ROSTKER: I do. I think part of the
environmental monitoring for the future should be low-level
chemical monitors just as we take soil and water samples and
the like.
MR. TURNER: Thank you, doctor.
DR. LASHOF: Are there any other questions? If
not, thank you very much. This has been extremely helpful and
we'll resume tomorrow morning at 8:30.