Toxicity Thresholds and Health Effects: Sarin and Cyclosarin
Assessment
I. OVERVIEW AND APPROACH
This toxicity assessment reviews and evaluates the information and assesses the human risk from
possible low-level chemical warfare agent exposure. The existing occupational and general population
guidelines for sarin were derived from no-adverse-effect levels and levels known to produce the
mildest detectable effects. The exposure conditions are extrapolated to chronic (i.e., long-term)
exposures and safety margins were incorporated into the guidelines (Department of Defense &
Central Intelligence Agency, 2002, Appendix B, Section IV.B).

II. SARIN (GB) TOXICOLOGICAL PROFILE
A. Mechanism of Action
Sarin is a toxic, relatively nonpersistent, volatile nerve agent developed in Germany during World War
II and, subsequently, produced and tested in the United States. It evaporates at about the same rate as
water. It exerts its effects by powerfully inhibiting the enzyme acetylcholinesterase (AChE), which is
required for proper nerve and muscle function. This inhibition adversely affects skeletal muscle,
parasympathetic end organs, and central nervous system operation, thereby interfering with the
fundamental mechanisms required for normal function of the central and peripheral nervous systems
(Department of Defense & Central Intelligence Agency, 2002, Section II.B).

B. Acute Effects
The type and severity of clinical symptoms of sarin exposure depend on this agent's route of entry
into the body and the magnitude of exposure. When the eyes and nasal passages are exposed to sarin
vapor, the earliest signs expected are local effects, specifically miosis (pinpoint pupils) and rhinorrhea
(runny nose), rather than systemic effects. However, if exposure is through the skin or by ingestion,
the pupils may be approximately normal in size and rhinorrhea absent, while other symptoms may
be present (Department of Defense & Central Intelligence Agency, 2002, Section II.B).
Decreases in cholinesterase in red blood cells (RBC-ChE) and plasma (serum or Butyrylcholinesterase
(BuChE)) often can be detected at low-level exposures to sarin and, depending on exposure route and
duration, before other symptoms, including miosis, appear (Department of Defense & Central
Intelligence Agency, 2002, Section II.B).

C. Dose-Response Relationships
An exposure dosage, Ct (concentration (C) in milligrams per cubic meter (mg/m³), multiplied by the
exposure time in minutes (t)) of 0.5 mg-min/m³ of sarin is deemed the no-effect dosage in humans;
less than 1% of a working population would show miosis. No systemic effects are expected below 4.0
mg-min/m³, no deaths are expected below 10.0 mg-min/m³, and the effective Ct for red blood cell
cholinesterase depression in 50% of humans is 20 mg-min/m³. The estimated 50% lethal
concentration (LCt₅₀) for sarin in a 70-kilogram man breathing at the rate of 15 liters per minute is
approximately 70 mg-min/m³ (Department of Defense & Central Intelligence Agency, 2002, Section
II.B).

D. Cumulative Effects
Sarin's effects may be cumulative if the time between two or more exposures is less than
approximately 120 days, because it takes this long to restore cholinesterase activity to its normal
level. Thus, repeated asymptomatic exposures to small amounts of sarin, if somewhat close together,
can result in symptoms (Department of Defense & Central Intelligence Agency, 2002, Section II.B).

III. CYCLOSARIN (GF) TOXICOLOGICAL PROFILE
A. Chemical Properties
Cyclosarin is a toxic, relatively nonpersistent nerve agent similar to but much less volatile than sarin—
cyclosarin evaporates 20 times more slowly. However, it is unlikely to persist in the environment
more than a few days. There is less information in the scientific literature on cyclosarin's chemistry
and toxicology than on sarin's. Except for acute exposures, cyclosarin is less toxic than sarin by
inhalation and slightly more toxic by dermal exposure (Department of Defense & Central Intelligence
Agency, 2002, Section II.C).

B. Acute Effects
The combined toxicity of sarin and cyclosarin does not indicate synergism. Although chronic toxicity
data for cyclosarin are sparse, this agent is expected to behave like sarin. Both cause neural lesions in
nonhuman primates, but the LCt₅₀ for cyclosarin is as much as five times higher than LCt₅₀ for sarin
(i.e., cyclosarin is less lethal). No data exist to suggest cyclosarin causes OPIDN at the low level
exposure concentrations bounded by the GPL for this modeling (Department of Defense & Central
Intelligence Agency, 2002, Section II.C).

IV. EXPOSURE GUIDELINES AND THRESHOLDS

A. Occupational Exposure Guidelines for Sarin
The US Army and CDC recommend an air concentration guideline of 0.0001 mg/m³ averaged over
an eight-hour workday for a Worker Population Limit (WPL). A person exposed for eight hours at the
occupational guideline thus would receive a maximum estimated exposure dose of sarin of 0.048
mg-min/m³. The air concentration for the occupational guideline was calculated based on data from
experiments with human volunteers and kinetic studies of cholinesterase depression and recovery
that determined a no-effects level of 0.5 mg-min/m³ (Department of Defense & Central Intelligence
Agency, 2002, Appendix B, Section IV.C.1).

B. General Population Guidelines
The US Army and CDC recommend an airborne concentration level of 0.000003 mg/m³ as the
general population guideline. A person exposed for 72 hours at the general population guideline
would receive a calculated maximum exposure of sarin of 0.01296 mg-min/m³. This exposure
guideline applies to non-workers, including sensitive subpopulations. The general population
exposure guideline for sarin was derived by taking the occupational guideline for sarin and applying
another safety factor to protect the most sensitive subpopulations (Department of Defense & Central
Intelligence Agency, 2002, Appendix B, Section IV.C.2).

C. Threshold Values Used in Modeling
The thresholds used to establish low-level exposure for the modeling are:
First Noticeable Effects (FNE)
The dosage below which no visible effect, including the most sensitive, miosis, becomes manifest.
Sarin's FNE dose was estimated as 1.0 milligram-minute per cubic meter of air (mg-min/m³) for
short-term exposures. For cyclosarin, scientists consider sarin one-half as toxic as cyclosarin at
exposure levels that would produce an FNE (ratio 1:2); therefore, cyclosarin's FNE is estimated as 0.5
mg-min/m³ (Department of Defense & Central Intelligence Agency, 2002, Section III.D.1).
General Population Limit (GPL)
The concentration below which any member of the general population could be exposed (i.e., inhale)
continuously for 24 hours a day, every day, for a lifetime (70 years) without experiencing any adverse
health effects. In 1988, the CDC approved a GPL for sarin defined as a concentration of 0.000003
milligrams per cubic meter of air (mg/m³). Scientists consider sarin one-third as toxic as cyclosarin at

low levels equal to the GPL (ratio 1:3), resulting in a GPL for cyclosarin of 0.000001 mg/m³
(Department of Defense & Central Intelligence Agency, 2002, Section III.D.1).

D. Dispersion Model Input Values
Because the possible exposures that servicemembers experienced from the Khamisiyah Pit release
involved much briefer periods than those for which the GPL was designed, the DoD team applied an
adjustment factor more closely representing a single day's exposure limit to the GPL to accommodate
the difference in exposure duration. To use this adjusted value (AdjGPL) in the dispersion modeling,
the concentration was converted to an exposure dosage rate (Ct) in units of mg-min/m³ (Department
of Defense & Central Intelligence Agency, 2002, Section III.D.2).
Table: Calculating toxicity input parameters used in dispersion models
Agent

GPL

Adjusted GPL

Exposure rate per time (daily "Ct")

sarin

0.000003 mg/m³

0.00003 mg/m³

0.0432 mg-min/m³

cyclosarin [sarin/3]

0.000001 mg/m³

0.00001 mg/m³

0.0144 mg-min/m³

E. M8A1 Detector Threshold
The M8A1 Chemical Warfare Agent Detector Alarm threshold is 0.1 mg/m³. The M8A1 alarm is
designed to provide early warning for forces, this threshold should be reached before the FNE. The
M8A1 area encloses the FNE area, meaning the alarm is designed to protect forces before the FNE
level is reached (Department of Defense & Central Intelligence Agency, 2002, Section IV).

V. COMBINED TOXICITY ASSESSMENT
A. Sarin-Cyclosarin Mixture
The Khamisiyah Pit release comprised GB and GF chemical warfare agents. With the availability of
toxic data for both sarin and cyclosarin, a simple scheme was used in the 2000 modeling to account
for the toxicity of the sarin-cyclosarin mixture so that contours for the combined mixture could be
determined. Since cyclosarin's GPL dosage is one-third sarin's, an effective composite agent dosage,
D_composite, was defined as the sarin dosage, D_sarin, plus three times the cyclosarin dosage,
D_cyclosarin:
D_composite = D_sarin + 3 × D_cyclosarin

Then D_composite was measured against the GPL dosage threshold for sarin, 0.0432 mg-min/m³, to
determine the possible exposure contours. The composite FNE dosage was similarly treated, except
cyclosarin's FNE dosage is half sarin's, so the factor of three in the formula above was replaced by a
factor of two (Department of Defense & Central Intelligence Agency, 2002, Section IV.D.6).

VI. HEALTH RISK CHARACTERIZATION
A. Exposure Analysis
Due to the nature of the possible exposures and toxicants in question, no appropriate exposure
guideline levels exist with which to compare modeled exposure concentrations. The existing
guidelines, i.e., General Population Limit (GPL) and worker population limit (WPL), are intended for
public and/or occupational health professionals to protect these populations from adverse effects due
to long-term exposure (Department of Defense & Central Intelligence Agency, 2002, Section V.B).

B. Critical Studies
McNamara and Leitnaker (1971) reported a dosage of 0.5 mg-min/m³ as sarin's no-effect level in
humans, at which less than 1% of a working population would show miosis, red blood cell
cholinesterase (RBC-ChE) depression, rhinorrhea, or other mild symptoms. Other scientists used this
no-effect level in conjunction with pharmacokinetic data to derive the WPLs and GPLs (Department of
Defense & Central Intelligence Agency, 2002, Section V.B).
US Army ERDEC reported the 50% effective Ct (ECt₅₀) for miosis and rhinorrhea as less than 2 mgmin/m³, with an exposure of 3 mg-min/m³ producing miosis in most of the population. Other DoD
and CIA assessments of possible agent exposures at Khamisiyah have used an estimated exposure of
1 mg-min/m³ as a first noticeable effects level (Department of Defense & Central Intelligence Agency,
2002, Section V.B).

C. Uncertainties in Risk Analysis
Some degree of uncertainty is present in every human health risk evaluation. Common to the
methodologies used, this risk evaluation contains various uncertainties, including:
Those associated with the toxicology of the nerve agents sarin and cyclosarin
Those associated with the possible unit exposures
Those inherent in the risk assessment process (Department of Defense & Central Intelligence
Agency, 2002, Section V.C)

Toxicological Uncertainties
The most significant toxicological uncertainty is the relative lack of data related to low-dose, noeffects exposure to sarin; none for cyclosarin. During vapor exposure studies and unintentional vapor
exposures, the first signs and symptoms are usually miosis, rhinorrhea, and/or chest tightness. Early
studies often defined an individual as exposed based on the appearance of at least one of these
symptoms (Department of Defense & Central Intelligence Agency, 2002, Appendix B, Section V.A).
Exposure Estimate Uncertainties
Determining whether an individual actually was exposed to a noxious chemical and, if so, to how
much and for how long is difficult and involves considerable uncertainty. Estimating an exposure in
combat situations is no trivial problem. Temperature, humidity, skin moisture, exposed surfaces, fit of
personal protective equipment, pretreatment, wind strength and direction, the agent's form, soldier's
activity level, host susceptibility, and other factors make estimating field doses a complex problem
(Department of Defense & Central Intelligence Agency, 2002, Appendix B, Section V.B).

VII. SUMMARY OF RISK ASSESSMENT
A. Key Findings
A comprehensive toxicity assessment for sarin and cyclosarin was performed, regulatory guidance
and relevant data were reviewed, and a risk evaluation was completed. Reviewing existing
toxicological data suggests it is unlikely exposure to sarin or cyclosarin at concentrations below those
needed to cause acute signs, symptoms, or ChE inhibition will cause long-term adverse health effects
to develop. However, human studies specifically designed to address chronic effects from low-level
asymptomatic exposure to sarin are unavailable (Department of Defense & Central Intelligence
Agency, 2002, Appendix B, Section VI).

B. Long-term Effects Assessment
Multiple lines of evidence indicate GB does not have carcinogenic, mutagenic, or teratogenic
properties. Therefore, no increases in birth defects or cancer would be expected from low-dose,
asymptomatic exposure to GB. Available data suggest that exposure levels below those inducing
convulsions do not cause cardiomyopathy. Other than sarin's well-known neurotoxic effects, no
general adverse health effects from low-level exposure to sarin have been evidenced (Department of
Defense & Central Intelligence Agency, 2002, Appendix B, Section VI).

C. Final Conclusions

Based on available data on servicemembers' apparent health status, modeling results, and
toxicological data, this risk assessment concludes that the exposure dosages possibly received by
forces at Khamisiyah were smaller than should cause acute health effects (e.g., as miosis) or longterm health effects (e.g., OPIDN). Although exposure to sarin itself at the estimated concentrations
may not cause any adverse health effects, this finding does not preclude the possibility of adverse
health effects resulting from any number of combinations of noxious chemicals and/or other
stressors (Department of Defense & Central Intelligence Agency, 2002, Appendix B, Section VI).
References:
Department of Defense & Central Intelligence Agency. (2002). Modeling the chemical warfare agent
release at the Khamisiyah Pit [Technical report]. Office of the Special Assistant for Gulf War Illnesses.
McNamara, B. P., & Leitnaker, M. C. (1971). Estimation of human exposure to agents GB and VX (EATR
4106). Edgewood Arsenal.

