DR. LASHOF: I'd like to move on now to the U.N.
Inspection Report and welcome the Honorable Charles Duelfer and
Mr. Egor Mitrokhin. Also, I think -- everyone's knowledge the
questions that related to DOD in relation to the experimental -- we can address this afternoon under medical surveillance.
GEN Parker is here and we'll ask him to join David (inaudible)
and respond to some of the questions we had that are more
referable to DOD. We believe Mr. Duelfer and Mr. Mitrokhin are
here.
Okay, thank you, very, very much for agreeing to
appear before us again. You were extremely helpful to us on
your last appearance and I understand you've flown in from
abroad for this occasion and are flying back out of the country
again to Europe tomorrow or later today. We certainly
appreciate it and hope that you're not so jet-lagged that this
will create any problems for you, but you're probably an expert
at that now. Go ahead.
MR. DUELFER: Thank you, very much, Dr. Lashof.
Buffalo is much better than Baghdad, but as I -- as you've
mentioned, both Egor and I have just returned from Iraq. We're
happy to be here and we think the work you're doing is, of
course, very important and we're happy to contribute in some
small way to your work.
I am accompanied, once again, by Egor Mitrokhin, who
has worked for the Commission on the Iraq chemical weapons
program since 1991, and has a very deep historical
understanding of all aspects of our work and the Iraqi program.
Let me begin first by reminding the committee of the mandate
that the U.N. Special Commission. We are tasked by specific
United Nation Security Council resolutions with ridding Iraq of
its weapons of mass destruction programs and putting in place
some monitoring system to detect potential efforts to
reconstitute such programs.
Our mandate to operate in Iraq is strictly limited to
these purposes. The Commission has assisted inquiries into the
Gulf War Syndrome phenomena on a non interference basis as
appropriate. So, in other words, we're happy to help, but we
have to abide by the strictures of our particular mandate. We
have tried to be helpful within our limited resources, but I
would point out that our resources are very limited. We have
only full time, three experts in New York who work in the
chemical weapons field and their task has been to eliminate one
of the world's largest arsenals of chemical weapons. So, they
have been very busy just performing their normal activities.
I also must begin with a caveat and that is that what
we will present represents our best understanding as of the
moment. Future work may reveal additional details or revisions
to what we have and as I think everyone is aware, extracting
information from Iraq is not necessarily a smooth or even
process. But onto our presentation.
In Chicago last year we presented information
available at that time on 122 millimeter sarin-filled rockets
found by the Commission at Khamisiyah Ammo Depot. In addition,
since then in the period of this past spring we've provided
additional technical details required for the modeling purposes
which have been carried out by the task force. This has
included information on the purity of the agents at the time
and the construction of the warhead.
Since that time, the Commission has been able to make
further progress in the investigation of Iraq's chemical
weapons program. Some new information on the deployment of
chemical weapons in January 1991, has been obtained by UNSCOM
and it's that at which we think may be relevant to today's
meeting. In this presentation we'll focus on other facilities
where Iraq now claims 122 millimeter-sarin rockets and 155
millimeter mustard shells were deployed in January 1991.
As you've been briefed before, according to Iraq's
initial declarations provided to UNSCOM in the spring of 1991,
mentioned above, chemical weapons were distributed in the
following fashion. We'll have the first slide at this point.
That's the way Iraq declares it to us, (laughter) and this is
the way we interpret it. I wish it were that easy. (laughter)
At Muthanna State Establishment, and incidentally at exactly
one week ago, both Egor and I were at Muthanna State
Establishment, but at that location Iraq declared 6,160 122
millimeter rockets. At Fallujah Proving Ground they declared
6,394 155 millimeter shells. According to Iraq these had been
moved there from the Muthanna State Establishment.
At the Nassiriyah Depot Iraq declared 6,240 155
millimeter shells, these are mustard shells. Which had been
moved to the vicinity of Khamisiyah. Nassiriyah and Khamisiyah
are not terribly distant and they had moved them there for
protection purposes.
Lastly, Iraq had declared 2,160 122 millimeter
rockets, the sarin rockets, at the Khamisiyah Depot. Six
thousand, three hundred and ninety-four 155 millimeter shells
have been verified since then at the Fallujah facility in the
spring of 1991. If we can go to the next slides. This one is
-- I'm getting ahead of myself. This is a slide of the
Khamisiyah area where the 155 millimeter shells had been moved
to from Nassiriyah. Okay, next slide.
Now, these are the 155 millimeter rounds which we
found at the Fallujah Proving Ground. The individual in the
lower picture with the green -- sort of green shirt and funny
hat, is Egor Mitrokhin and I'm going to ask him to describe the
next series of slides which are images from -- from the
Fallujah facility.
MR. MITROKHIN: (Voice fades in and out) ... by the
deputy executive chairman of the Commission inspected this
facility -- I'm sorry. In September '90, '91 and as a result
of this inspection the Commission was able to make an
accounting of some 6,000 155 millimeter mustard-filled shells.
In order to verify the pay load of these shells the samples
were taken, the samples of mustard were taken and analyzed
later on. Next slide, please.
Here you can see the procedures used by the
inspection team for sampling of those 155 millimeter mustard
shells and in particular four shells were put and prepared
(inaudible) in plastic sleeves. Next slide. They were drilled
by our experts. Next slide. You can see also the normal
decontamination procedures which were a part of our activities
in '91, '92, and finally the samples were taken and later on
the samples were distributed to three laboratories in different
countries and we've had the very good results which did
(inaudible). In general, we found that the purity of mustard
taken from these shells were about 90 percent. Between 85 and
95 percent. Thank you. Next slide please.
Also, 120 millimeter CS mortar bombs were observed in
this site and later on in 1992. The Commission made an
accounting for this munitions. They were found at this
facility early in '91. Taking into account that they were
burnt heavily. The Commission didn't make an accounting in
'91, but came back to this site in '92.
MR. DUEFLER: Thank you. In the period from 1996 to
1997 the Commission has undertaken to investigate further the
history of the production, filling and deployment of the 155
millimeter mustard shells and also the 122 millimeter sarin
rockets. This, again, is for our purposes to assure that Iraq
has declared everything and that we have accounted for all the
munitions and they do not retain any kind of a covert supply.
Responding to questions addressed by UNSCOM to Iraq,
they submitted in the summer of 1996 a third official chemical
declaration. This is a process by which they are obligated to
provide, formal declarations to the Commission of their
activities. It's the third because each of the prior two had
been inaccurate and not complete. We are in the process of
attempting to verify whether this third one is, in fact, better
than the other two. It did, nevertheless, contain additional
information. On the basis of this new declaration and also
other information, including documents obtained by the
Commission, we've been able to derive the following
information. Go to the next slide here.
According to information provided in Iraq's
documents, Iraq had 13,500 mustard-filled 155 millimeter
projectiles prior to the Gulf War. They were filled with
mustard in 1990 prior to 15 October and the purity of the
mustard ranged from 85 to 95 percent when filled. Prior to 31
December 1990, a part of the 155 millimeter mustard munitions
stored in the bunker area of the Muthanna State Establishment,
there were 7,000 there and at the Muhammadiyat storage facility
where there was 4,500.
Also, all Soccer 18 122 millimeter rockets were
stored empty prior to November 1990. These are just facts
which we believe are accurate that we obtained from Iraq
documents. The locations are shown on that chart where these
depots are, as well as the distribution. Seven thousand 155
millimeter shells at Muthanna; 4,500 155 millimeter shells at
Muhammadiyat and then the various locations where unfilled 122
millimeter rockets were located.
Now to focus on the mustard shells for a moment. In
January 1991, Iraq's Military Industrialization Corporation,
what we call MIC, requested Iraq's Ministry of Defense to
provide 31 trailers to deploy these 13,000 mustard-filled
munitions close to the field of operation. They recommended
that the storage of these weapons be placed in the open.
According to Iraq now, they were deployed to Aukhaider Depot in
the amount of 6,394 shells and the Nassiriyah Depot in the
amount of 6,240 shells. For a total of 12,634, which I would
draw your attention is less than 13,000.
In the period of January to February 1991, 155
millimeter munitions from Nassiriyah were transferred to the
desert area not far from the Khamisiyah Depot, as I mentioned
earlier. It was at this location that they were inspected by
the special commission in October 1991. That's what we
described to you last year. By the end of 1991 they were
returned to Muthanna where they were destroyed under UNSCOM's
supervision. In total, UNSCOM supervised the destruction of
12,792 mustard-filled 155 millimeter shells at Muthanna during
the period of 1992 to 1994. This was at a facility we call the
Chemical Destruction Facility and that operated for those two
years.
According to Iraq, 550 155 millimeter munitions were
destroyed during the war. This was only declared to us in
1996. However, Iraq has not provided us information on the
destruction locations. One thing you're going to note here is
that these numbers don't all add up precisely and there is some
uncertainty with respect to the margins for error.
Turning to the 122 millimeter rockets, in 1990 the
Iraqi Ministry of Defense ordered 8,320 122 millimeter rockets
to be filled with the sarin mixture of GB and GF. The filling
of the rockets began in Muthanna in December 1990. Seven
thousand Soccer 18 rockets were filled by 5 January and the
remaining 1,320 Soccer 18 rockets were filled by 9 January
1991. Our information is that around 60 tons of GB/GF mixture
were required to fill that number of munitions. Eight tons of
the mixture were produced by Muthanna in the fall of 1990. The
rest, around 50 tons, was produced after 18 December 1990. In the first half of January 1991, and this is
important because of degradation, that's when the degradation
would start in. In the first half of January 1991, sixty
vehicles were requested to deploy 8,320 filled rockets to
depots close to the anticipated field of operations. It was
recommended to store the rockets in bunkers. Among deployment
sites, Iraq declared the Khamisiyah Ammo Depot, which was to
have 2,160 rockets; the Aukhaider Ammo Depot, which was to
include 2,160 rockets; and the Mymona Ammo Depot, which was to
have 4,100 rockets. Again, the arithmetic is a little bit off.
That adds up to 8,420 not 8,320, but this is what Iraq declared
to us.
Previously Iraq had declared the Aukhaider Depot as a
CW storage area in the mid '80s, but not as a deployment site
in January 1991. Mymona -- in June last year Iraq declare that
Mymona was a deployment, a CW deployment site. That was for
the first time. Its specific location was not given to the
Commission by Iraq until January of this year, January 1997.
It has not yet been inspected by UNSCOM. So, what I'm saying
is these two deployment sites were not declared by Iraq until
last year.
These revelations -- put up the next slide now.
These revelations led UNSCOM to the inspection of the Aukhaider
Depot in April of this year, April 1997. During this
inspection three intact 155 millimeter projectiles, presumably
mustard-filled, were observed. The arrow points to the
locations there of the 155 millimeter rounds. Their location
is adjacent to the access road to bunkers supposedly used by
Iraq for CW storage. Can I have the next slide?
This is a line diagram that we have of the Aukhaider
Ammo Depot and the arrow points to the location which is shown
in the pictures and you can just barely make out where the road
is there on line diagram. According to the Iraqis the 155
millimeter mustard shells were stored on this road when the
bombing occurred. No CW or any other weapons were stored in
the surrounding bunkers during the bombardment. Iraq's
explanations concerning the bombardment of the road are
supported by photos of this area taken by UNSCOM in 1992, and
we can look at the next slide.
We have a couple of images from our helicopter. That
gives you the layout of the bunker area. You can make out some
of the craters. Including one to the right of the arrow, which
obviously, hits the road directly. There's a few other craters
in the area and the bunker has been hit. The arrow points to
the location of the 155 millimeter shells that we found in the
spring of this year. The next picture.
That's slightly a different picture, the same area.
At that time we were not prepared to do any sampling of those
rounds and it is yet for the Commission to examine those
particular three rounds to determine what, in fact, is inside
them. But we strongly assume that they are mustard rounds. If
Iraq's declaration on the accounting and deployment of the 155
millimeter mustard shells and the 122 millimeter sarin rockets
are correct, then the munitions at the Fallujah Proving Ground,
which we showed you earlier, could only have been brought from
the Aukhaider Depot.
Here I remind you, when Iraq first made its
declaration to the Commission in 1991, they did not declare
Mymona and Aukhaider. That is because there were no munitions
then located at either of those locations, according to the
Iraqis. Those munitions have, subsequently, been moved back to
either Fallujah or the Muthanna State Establishment. There is
supporting evidence for this explanation. One hundred and four
155 millimeter shells had been observed at the Fallujah area
were burned. We'll go to the next slide, 13.
Now, it could have happened during the bombardment of
the above-mentioned access road. However, the number of
damaged munitions at Aukhaider could not be confirmed. In our
estimate it could range from 104 to possibly 550, which is to
say the Iraqi number of -- this is getting confusing, I know
-- but the 550 which Iraq says were somehow destroyed during
the war, plus perhaps the 104 which we did see at Fallujah. We
can go to the last slide.
So to try to summarize what we're saying here is, on
the basis of the information available, the following
deployment scenario is suggested. It's a little bit hard to,
to read that chart but the green square areas are the locations
which we now believe Iraq deployed 155 mm. mustard rounds and
122 mm. sarin rounds during January of 1991. In other words,
Aukhaider, Nassiriyah, Khamissiyah and the Mymona depot. The
movement of those is indicated by the arrows. They had been
moved back to Fallujah and the Muthanna State Establishment
prior to UNSCOM beginning its work later in 1991.
The red arrows indicate the deployment that Iraq
followed in anticipation of the war. In other words, they
filled the rockets with sarin at the Muthanna State
Establishment and then ordered them deployed to the three
depots indicated. In addition, they took the mustard rounds
and followed a similar procedure.
Again, this information is based on data which we
have available to us at the current time. Future inspections
and discussions in Iraq may provide more detail or revisions.
I would point out that the commission has not yet visited
Mymona. Quite frankly, that has not been our highest priority
with respect to eliminating the weapons of mass destruction in
Iraq; however to complete and verify other factors that are --
or to verify Iraq's claim that it has no longer any munitions
that we will be visiting Mymona. I'm not sure exactly when.
With that, I think it summarizes the presentation at this time.
I would like to ask Igor Mitrokhin at this point if he has any
immediate comments but otherwise we can just take your
questions. Do you have anything?
MR. IGOR MITROKHIN: Thank you very much so just to
repeat again that this deployment scenario is related only to
the two types of munitions which we had been requested to
explain because the whole deployment scenario is much more
complicated, this type of the aerial munitions, the missile
warheads. Thank you.
DR. LASHOF: Thank you very much. That's fairly
complicated scenario. I think we're open to questions. Do you
have any evidence -- I think I follow this -- but do you have
any evidence that they've deployed any land mines that had
chemical weapons that could have been --
MR. MITROKHIN: We've seen nothing, absolutely
nothing.
MAJ CROSS: Do you see any evidence where any
weapons were moved from the three lower depots, actually down
into Kuwait, maybe brought back at some time?
MR. DUELFER: We have seen no evidence of that and
Iraqis have said that no movements took place other than what
is described here.
MAJ CROSS: If I follow the time line it may
appear they didn't have the time to move it further down. It,
it seems that it was enough for them to just to get them down
that far. Is that a correct assumption, or --
MR. DUELFER: Well, if you're questioning, I mean,
this was as far as their dispersal took place, according to
what they have told us. They have specifically indicated that
they did not disperse them any further to units operating in
the more advanced positions.
MAJ CROSS: Okay.
MR. DUELFER: And again, I would emphasize that they
had stated quite categorically to us as recently as last week
that they did not use or employ any of these weapons.
DR. LASHOF: Does any of this add up to any other
inadvertent release by bombing during the war of nerve gas or
mustard that could have exposed our troops or do you feel that
the Khamissiyah is the totality?
MR. DUELFER: We have -- because our, the purposes
of our investigations are somewhat different, we ask ourselves
the questions a little bit differently. We, when we go to
sites we see is there any contamination of the area and, you
know, from 1991 on forward that is the question which we ask
ourselves when we visit areas. And there has been
contamination of other areas in addition to Khamissiyah that we
have visited but this is not a surprise. I mean, for example,
the Muthanna State Establishment, which is an enormous
facility, kilometers on each side with, you know, lots of
buildings and bunkers, was heavily contaminated when we first
arrived in 1991. It, it had undergone a lot of bombing.
Similarly, Muhammadiyat was also the target of some bombing but
these are areas which are, are quite far north. With respect
to the southern areas, as far as I know, the only areas which
indicated any contamination was the Khamissiyah depot.
MAJ KNOX: So if troops were deployed north at the
time of the war or even after the demolition of Khamissiyah,
they could have been contaminated with things that may have,
may have already been there. Is that what you're saying?
MR. DUELFER: Well, what I'm saying is that, that,
you know, the locations where we have indications of, of
contamination are roughly those three: Khamissiyah, Muthanna
State Establishment, and Muhammadiyat. Now, I mean,
geographically, I mean, Muthanna State Establishment and
Muhammadiyat are up closer to Baghdad, very close to Baghdad
and, you know, where the troops were, you would have to get a
definitive answer from someone else but so far as I know they,
they were not, they didn't stray that far north.
MR. TURNER: Can we just focus on a Aukhaider for,
for a minute Mr. Duelfer? Aukhaider is somewhat south of
Karbala. Is, is that right?
MR. DUELFER: It's, in the, in the area. You know,
we call it Aukhaider, I think during the war the Americans
tended to call it Karbala. They used that name itself but the
short answer is yes.
MR. TURNER: And the, the Iraqis told the UN that
they had deployed how many mustard rounds there?
MR. DUELFER: Six thousand three hundred and ninety-four, which is the same number which was then indicated at
Fallujah.
MR. TURNER: And in your inspections there, you
found rounds that you believe were likely mustard rounds
although you have not -- the UN when I say you --
MR. DUELFER: I don't --
MR. TURNER: -- for example, those --
MR. DUELFER: -- those three rounds which we, we
buried, you know, we haven't haven't opened them so we can't
prove that they're mustard definitively but we have no reason
to believe they're anything other than mustard rounds.
MR. TURNER: Did the Iraqis give you indications
that Aukhaider had been bombed by coalition forces during the
air war?
MR. DUELFER: Yes.
MR. TURNER: And that at Fallujah in your
inspection work there, the UN found 104 mustard rounds that had
fire damage on them?
MR. DUELFER: They, they gave -- they looked like
they had been burned and damaged.
MR. TURNER: So even without contamination evidence
at Aukhaider, you do have some indications that there may have
been a release of that there during the air war?
MR. DUELFER: If you would make the assumption,
which is probably a very good assumption, that the rounds in
Fallujah came from Aukhaider, yes.
MR. TURNER: And again, working on the imperfect
knowledge that we have today, the range of likely is from 104
to the 104 plus 500 and --
MR. DUELFER: Fifty.
MR. TURNER: Fifty. So 654 is the range of
munitions that may have been damaged by aerial bombing at
Aukhaider.
MR. DUELFER: Based on a statement by Iraq, of 550
for the number we're just -- that they claim were destroyed
during the war, plus the uncertainty associated with, you know,
the 104, as best we know right now, the upper range would be
the number you suggested.
MR. TURNER: Iraq also indicated to you that sarin
rockets were deployed or stored at Aukhaider, a couple thousand
I believe. Is that correct?
MR. DUELFER: Yes.
MR. TURNER: Is there any indication that those
were damaged or in any way involved in the aerial bombardment
there?
MR. DUELFER: We have no information that they were
damaged. No.
MR. TURNER: Finally, on the second site that is
new, I believe which is Mymona --
MR. DUELFER: Mymona.
MR. TURNER: -- somewhat north of Basrah, the UN
has not visited there yet. Is that, is that correct --
MR. DUELFER: That's correct.
MR. TURNER: -- to do an inspection of this, these
most recent Iraqi revelations that chemical munitions had been
stored there.
MR. DUELFER: Correct, we have not yet visited that
location.
MR. TURNER: Have the Iraqis given you any
indications that chemical munitions may have been damaged at
Mymona?
MR. DUELFER: No.
MR. TURNER: Thank you.
MAJ CROSS: Now, when you do go to Mymona, part of
your investigation is to sample the surrounding areas to see if
there was some contamination. Would --
MR. DUELFER: Yes.
MAJ CROSS: -- that be a normal procedure?
MR. DUELFER: I mean, because we have to establish,
I mean, if there were rounds there, if they were destroyed, we
need to account for them. So part of our inspection would be,
logically, to see if any of the rounds had been damaged.
MR. LONGBRAKE: What, what were the chemical munitions
at Mymona? What did they contain?
MR. DUELFER: They -- what, what Iraq declared to us
was the sarin-filled rockets.
MR. LONGBRAKE: Okay. And they, and what happened?
What did they do with them once they were --
MR. DUELFER: After the war, they moved them back to
the Muthanna State Establishment.
DR. NISHIMI: One other question to clarify on the
Aukhaider, so we're looking at potentially a range of a 104 and
4- to 654 mustard shells filled with agent of a purity between
85 and 95 percent? Is that a fair characterization of what may
have been stored at Aukhaider?
MR. DUELFER: You're drawing a conclusion which I --
is, is not unreasonable but what Iraq has told us is simply,
you know, five --
DR. NISHIMI: Right.
MR. DUELFER: -- hundred and fifty. They haven't
confirmed that these are, were filled at a certain point in
time. So, I don't know whether the, what the purity levels
would be.
DR. NISHIMI: Okay.
MR. DUELFER: But, but, you know, what you're
suggesting is, is reasonable.
DR. NISHIMI: Okay.
DR. PORTER: The committee staff provided you with
a list of 17 sites that were suspected chemical sites in the
Kuwaiti theater of operation. This list was one that was
circulated to US forces after the ground war. Have you had
occasion to have an inspection of any of these sites on the
list of 17?
MR. DUELFER: Now, we, I'm familiar with that.
We've been to, I think, two of them but I'll ask Igor to
comment on that specifically.
MR. MITROKHIN: Thank you, sir. We evaluated the list
that we received from the committee and we found that, in
total, we inspected four facilities listed in this document.
In particular, UNSCOM inspected, of course, Nassiriyah munition
depot, Khamissiyah ammunition depot, Tallil Air Field in 1992
and also underground storage bunkers which is entry number 12
on your list. This was inspected in 1994.
The results of following inspections at Nassiriyah
and Khamissiyah ammunition depots are well-known and we briefed
the committee on these results. Concerning Tallil Air Field
and underground storage bunkers which appeared to be the stores
of metal missiles were inspected and no evidence of chemical
weapons found there. Thank you.
DR. PORTER: Let, let me understand. There were
four sites of the 17 that UNSCOM visited.
MR. MITROKHIN: That is correct.
DR. PORTER: And of course one was Khamissiyah, we
know the Khamissiyah story, but at the other three sites, the
inspection revealed no evidence of chemical weapons or damage.
MR. MITROKHIN: Actually, yes. As it was explained by
Mr. Duelfer, 155 mm. shells were removed from Nassiriyah
ammunition depot prior to UNSCOM arrival and later on these
were found in the vicinity of the Khamissiyah ammunition depot
in the desert area. Concerning two remaining sites, Tallil Air
Field and underground storage bunkers, no evidence of chemical
weapons were found there.
DR. LASHOF: Are there any other questions? Not?
Thank you very, very much for coming. I know it's been a long
and torturous trip for you and off again but it certainly has
been helpful.
MR. DUELFER: Thank you very much. We wish you well
in your work. You have a difficult task as well.
DR. LASHOF: We will adjourn now for lunch and we
will have a fairly long break because we are a little bit ahead
of schedule. We will resume at 2:15.
BREAK
DR. LASHOF: I believe we are ready to commence the
afternoon session. Captain Trump, welcome. You will address
the issue of medical surveillance and General Parker, happy to
have you join him when we're finished with the presentation on
medical surveillance, we'll open it up for some questions and
you will follow up on the issues we were discussing with
Pendergast this morning about the use of investigational drugs.
Thank you, go ahead.
CAPT DAVID TRUMP: Thank you. The first overhead
please. Madam chairman, distinguished committee members,
committee staff, on behalf of the assistant secretary of
defense for health affairs and the Department of Defense I
thank you for the opportunity to provide the committee with
information on the department's implementation efforts and
future plans for medical surveillance. I'm Capt. Dave Trump, a
public health physician who is director of military public
health within the Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense
for Health Affairs. Next slide please.
In both the interim and final report, the committee
recommended prior to any deployment the Department of Defense
should undertake a thorough health evaluation of a large sample
of troops to enable better post-deployment medical
epidemiology. Medical surveillance should be standardized for
a course out of tests across all services including timely
post-deployment follow-up. The department strongly agrees with
the importance of pre- and post-deployment health assessment.
You received testimony at your June meeting regarding our use
of pre- and post-deployment health assessment questionnaires
for recent deployments. As noted during that previous
testimony, the department's position is that all deploying
service members of specified deployment should receive pre- and
post-deployment screening to include standardized health
screening questionnaires with medical follow-up as clinically
indicated. Next overhead please.
This medical surveillance initiative was just one
element of a comprehensive plan for medical surveillance during
deployments that were tested during Operation Joint Endeavor
and is being formalized in DOD policy. Implementation of a
medical surveillance program, especially in the pre- and post-deployment health assessment was a challenge for operations in
Bosnia. Such health assessments were not part of the military
doctrine, prior training or planning. Decisions on what to
implement and how to do it were made very late in the
deployment planning, and admittedly every single element of the
program was not well executed. For example, pre-deployment
health assessments which were initially proposed were not done
because many of the units had already deployed. Next overhead
please.
The General Accounting Office's report defense health
care medical surveillance improved since the Gulf War but mixed
results in Bosnia that was released this past May serves as a
good assessment of our efforts. The report focused on the
steps the department has taken to improve medical surveillance
before, during and after deployments -- or after Operation
Joint Endeavor. The GAO does credit the department, the joint
staff and the commander in chief US European Command with
implementing a comprehensive program but -- next slide please --
the real world of implementation was not complete.
And I'll just highlight here in the next two sets of
overheads some, the GAO findings, in particular on this medical
surveillance. That information on who deployed was considered
inaccurate for the Air Force and Navy personnel participating
in that operation. That when they looked at Army personnel,
out of 618 medical, or, records, that they found that 24
percent did not receive in-theater post-deployment medical
assessments, 21 percent did not receive a home station post
deployment medical assessment and 32 percent had not received
tuberculin skin tests. Next slide please.
When home station post-deployment assessments were
done, they were performed on average 100 days after return
rather than the 30 days that had been prescribed at the
beginning of the program. And the documentation in the
individual's permanent medical records of in-theater post-deployment
medical assessments, medical service visits during
the deployment and for some, receipt of tick-borne encephalitis
vaccine was incomplete. Finally, reliance on pre-deployment
serum samples maintained in the central serum repository showed
that nine 9.3 percent of service members who deployed did not
have a sample in the repository and that many of those were
several years old. Next slide please.
We expect and we have acknowledged that there is room
for improvement in aspects of the medical surveillance during
Operation Joint Endeavor. It really was a -- we are a learning
organization. This really was an opportunity to test out some
of these ideas. There were also successes during the
deployment. There was regular surveillance of out-patient
visits and hospitalizations. That data was analyzed and use on
a regular basis in-theater and was reviewed routinely by both
the Joint Staff and, on at least a monthly basis, by the
assistant secretary of defense for health affairs and the
surgeon generals. Environmental sampling was conducted by Army
preventative medicine assets, in particular at the theater
medical laboratory that was deployed and preventable diseases
were kept at a low level. Next slide please.
One example just of the tracking that was presented
on a routine basis to -- at briefings in Washington was on the
out-patient visit rates which were tracked on a weekly basis
and again, routinely reviewed by the Joint Staff. And when
questions came up they were investigated, trends were assessed
also, not only for the total out-patient visits but for
specific diagnostic categories. Next one please.
Similarly, admission rates were monitored during this
period. The peak that you see here towards the end of the
graph was looked into. The analysis really suggested that
there was no single category of diseases that was accounting
for that increase; there was no change in the out-patient
visits at that time and really was coincident with the change
in the medical units that were providing services in-theater.
And in that transition it was felt that the different practice
patterns of the group and being new to the area accounted for
the increased change.
The other important piece of information is that the
Army medical surveillance activity under the US Army Center for
Health Promotion and Preventive Medicine has routinely
published analyses of the hospitalization experience. Their
most recent publication was "Hospitalizations: Operation Joint
Endeavor - Temporal and Demographic Correlates of
Hospitalization Risk" which appeared just in June, in the June
issue of their medical surveillance monthly report. Part two
will look at the specific diagnostic categories. Next slide
please.
Members of the Army's 520th Theater Area Medical
Laboratory, the US Army Center for Health Promotion and
Preventive Medicine teams and other preventive medicine teams
conducted over 2,000 environmental samples of air, water and
soil that, to date, have produced over 125,000 separate
analyses. This was a wide-spread effort, much more intensive
at the beginning of the deployment but continues to date as
needed. And the real accomplishments will be in the years --
in the future when there, if there are any questions raised
about what service members were exposed to, this information is
in a central data base. Next slide please.
This is just to update you on re-deployment health
screening itself, up through July 11th. Looking at what we
have in the deployment surveillance team's database, phase one
are those that were done primarily in-theater evaluations and
to date there are over 33,000 of those records with the
deployment surveillance team, over 18,000 phase two evaluation
records which are those that are done upon return to home
station. And that for post-deployment screening, which is --
that over 76 percent of 30,000 service members who met the
requirements for post-deployment surveillance, they have at
least a phase one, phase two or potentially phase -- or both of
those forms in the database. Serum samples are also available
for 66 percent of those who required a post-deployment
surveillance serum sample. Next slide please.
Medical surveillance initiatives were being tested
during the Bosnia operation. We have learned lessons from the
Gulf War and we are trying to improve upon our performance. We
learned more lessons during Operation Joint Endeavor including
reinforcing our position that medical surveillance efforts need
to be integrated with our military doctrine, that's both
medical and operational doctrine, with the routine medical and
operational procedures and practices, the thing that we do on a
day-to-day basis, rather that just for a particular operation
or exercise. It really needs to be part of the training of
what our corpsmen, officers, enlisted expect as part of the
routine requirements in garrison when they're here in the
States and also during routine exercises. And then, probably
most importantly needs to be integrated into the operational
and medical information management systems, and the department
continues to move in such directions. Next slide please.
In previously received testimony on the DOD Directive
Joint Medical Surveillance. This does establish the Department
of Defense's policy for the Office of the Secretary, the
military services, for the chairman of the Joint Chief of
Staff, for the combatant commands, the commanders-in-chief of
those, for all defense agencies and field activities. It has a
companion instruction on the implementation and application of
that program which assigns specific responsibilities and
establishes some specific procedures to implement those. Both
are scheduled for publication in September of 1997. It's
important to emphasize I think, as you'll recognize from the
previous slides on Operation Joint Endeavor, that many of the
aspects of the DOD directive and instruction were already
implemented in Bosnia and even though the paper isn't there yet
at the DOD level, most of the pieces are already being put in
place. Next slide please.
I will just highlight the key elements of the medical
surveillance program and the DOD policies which is that service
members are to be physically and mentally fit to carry out
their missions, especially upon deployment. That medical and
personnel systems are to be designed and integrated to achieve
medical surveillance goals, which is to maintain the health,
assess the health, and protect the physical and mental health
of service members. And that such systems should be
continuously in effect, not only during deployments but during
all periods of military service. Next slide please.
That service members will be made aware of
significant health threats and the corresponding preventive
countermeasures, both those of individual importance and also
those that will be used at the unit level. And that the
commanders are responsible for ensuring that medical support is
available and that members of the units do receive training in
the countermeasures. Next slide please.
Medical surveillance before, during and after
deployments will encompass monitoring environmental,
occupational and epidemiologic threat from stressors, assessing
diseases and non-battle injuries, stress-induced casualties and
combat casualties including those from chemical, biological and
nuclear warfare agents, and assessing and reinforcing use and
effectiveness of command directed and personal countermeasures,
and ensuring also that there is delivery of optimal medical
care during and after the deployment. Next slide please.
Commanders are kept -- additional points are that the
commanders should be kept informed before, during and after
deployment of the health of the force, of the individuals in
their unit, of the health threats that are out there, that the
stresses and risks to their force on the health side are made
available, and also made aware continuously of the available
countermeasures. It will be DOD policy that a serum repository
be maintained for clinical diagnosis and when appropriate,
epidemiologic studies that will use joint technologies, joint
practices and joint procedures to ensure consistency among the
services. And that surveillance activities will include DOD
civilian and contractor personnel when appropriate. Next slide
please.
I'll just go over these next slides which you have in
your packets. Basically, for each of the policy points and for
the instruction, the key elements tie into a matrix that really
shows that there's a continuum of many pieces that flow from
pre-deployment, during the deployment and after the deployment,
whether it's identifying the population at risk, rather it's
identifying the exposures -- next slide please -- whether it
is, in this case, what the exposure is pre-deployment, knowing
what the threats are in the area of operation and planning for
those specific threats, during the deployment, continuing to do
assessments, especially for occupational and environmental
exposures, analyzing the data that is collected in-theater.
And then after the deployment, updating the information so that
we have learned from the effort. Next slide please.
Similarly with protective measures is planning ahead
for those and incorporating those countermeasures into the
operational plan and then making sure the pre-deployment be
trained, equipped, supplied and immunized, provide briefings as
appropriate in preparation for the deployment, continue to
reinforce those during the deployment and then afterwards
identify where there might be new requirements. Next slide
please.
And finally, really to continuously assess health,
pre-deployment, as far as understanding the health of the
force, the health of individuals, so that we are sure that
individuals are ready and units are ready to deploy, and
maintaining the serum depository, continuing to assess health
during the deployment. And then upon return, monitoring the
health of the force, both active and reserve, for the long
term, and providing if necessary specific screening and target
medical evaluations. Next slide please.
One element of the instruction was to charter a
working group to guide many aspects of this effort for the
assistant secretary of defense for health affairs. That group
is titled the Joint Preventative Medicine Policy Group. It has
already been chartered. It's executive council is formed of
the preventative medical officers from the service surgeon
generals at headquarters Marine Corps staffs. It has
preventative medicine representatives from the Assistant
Secretary of Defense's for Health Affairs Office,
representatives from the Joint Staff, and on a plenary council
has brought a representation that really represents many
different components of the Department of Defense including the
Office of the Under-secretary of Defense for Environmental
Security, which is responsible for environmental programs and
different agencies within the DOD such as the Armed Forces
Medical Intelligence Center. And then this assets that are
there within the services and also at the level of the
combatant command surgeons.
The Joint Preventative Medicine Policy Group has
developed a business plan for deployment surveillance for the
near term, of making consistent joint-deployment surveillance a
reality within one year. Under a series of deliverables such
as providing any preventive medicine appendix to NXQ, NXQ being
the health services support annex to operational plans.
You heard at the last, your last hearing about
Patriot Medstar and evaluating the pre- and post-deployment
screening program in that setting. Also, the migration of some
of the DOD medical surveillance functions, analysis functions
for deployment surveillance to the US Army Center for Health
Promotion and Preventive Medicine, the group that provides
currently for the Army publishes the, their medical
surveillance monthly report. Next slide please.
Also very short, near-term goal within the next year
of getting interim automated DOD immunization tracking system
in place for the active duty force with a longer term goal of
having a system that can serve all of our beneficiary
population. There are also aspects of other implementation
plans for force protection and particularly preventive medicine
chapter of the department's medical readiness and support plan
and also for the Joint Health Services publication, and provide
preventive medicine force protection input for that. The
longer term business plan for comprehensive medical
surveillance is being developed. Next slide please.
The deputy director of medical readiness, Rear
Admiral Cowan on the Joint Staff, sponsored in June of this
year a casualty prevention seminar to meet one of those
deliverables of the business plan and in particular to provide
input to the Joint Health Service's support strategy for force
protection, with its goal of minimizing disease and non-battle
injuries, to serve as a force multiplier and also to sustain
the combat effectiveness of the force. An element of that is
the documentation of all relevant exposures and medical events.
Next slide please.
Within this, some of the results basically have five
key elements that are felt to be very important to embedding in
joint strategy: the principles of disease non-battle injury
prevention, the medical surveillance as part of joint doctrine
and planning, stressing and emphasizing the casualty prevention
as a command responsibility, that comprehensive medical
surveillance is essential to assessing threats to the readiness
of the force, that the countermeasures that are available are
effective risk management tools from minimizing adverse effects
on readiness and that continuous casualty prevention must be
fundamental to military readiness. Next slide please.
In its very early stages, the department's
participation in the response to the presidential review
directive, DOD will chair the health preparedness working group
with the co-chairs being the acting principal deputy assistant
secretary of defense for health affairs and the deputy director
for medical readiness on the Joint Staff. And this group will
just be one of several that will help ensure support at the
highest levels within the department for medical surveillance
efforts. Final slide, please.
In summary, the Department of Defense is moving
effectively to implement a more comprehensive medical
surveillance program for all military members. We believe that
a joint policy in plan, incorporated in day-to-day health care
operations, information management systems, routine operational
training in routine deployments will best prepare the military
to implement successfully a comprehensive medical surveillance
program during the next major combat operation. To be
successful, the military has learned to train as we fight and
fight as we train, joint medical surveillance must be the same.
Thank you. Are there any questions?
DR. LASHOF: Thank you very much. Open for
questions. Elaine?
DR. LARSON: Just for comparison, in Bosnia 76
percent of Army personnel received an in-theater post-deployment
assessment. For example, the average time for the
home station assessments was 100 days. How does that compare
with the Gulf War? Is one -- I'm looking for, is there
improvement? Worse? Has it changed?
CAPT TRUMP: There was no program for post-deployment --
DR. LARSON: Yeah, the people had post-deployment
physicals, didn't they?
MAJ KNOX: Yeah, but it was really before they exited.
CAPT TRUMP: Right.
DR. LARSON: Before they exited.
CAPT TRUMP: There was the requirement for, prior
to separation, to have a physical evaluation, physical
examination, as part of the separation process. This is -- but
that did not apply to all the personnel who served in the Gulf.
Those who remained on active duty would have had no requirement
for any evaluation upon return because pre- and post-deployment
surveillance really isn't a new requirement that ideally
shouldn't be applied to all people who have deployed to the
theater, and for Bosnia met some requirements as far as their
physical location within Croatia and parts of Hungary, and also
had been there for at least thirty days.
DR. LARSON: In this joint preventive medicine
policy group, when was it started? Before or after Bosnia?
CAPT TRUMP: After it was really, it was an
outgrowth of what was becoming a very real effort tied into the
department's response to Gulf War illness concerns that there
needed to be a multi-service effort. The individuals who were
involved now on the joint preventative medicine policy group
were actually the ones who had gotten together without a title
to help craft the Bosnia deployment plan for the assistant
secretary.
DR. LASHOF: When you state that among the 618 Army
personnel, as you say in your testimony, that 24 percent did
not receive in-theater post-deployment, 21 percent did not
receive a home station post-deployment, it leaves me a little
confused. I don't know whether the 21 percent who didn't
receive a home station post-deployment included the 24 who
didn't receive a theater post-deployment or were separate. I
don't know whether I'm supposed to add the 24 and 21 and come
up with 45 that didn't receive either or whether they're a
separate group.
CAPT TRUMP: That was from the GAO report. I think
those look, those, each of those evaluations independently but
I'd have to go back and double check those numbers.
DR. LASHOF: Okay. So you don't know how many they
assessed didn't have either home or --
CAPT TRUMP: It's in the report. I didn't -- I
don't have that number with me.
DR. LASHOF: We'll go back and check it. Thank
you.
DR. CASSELLS: Earlier this morning we were talking
to the FDA about timing and the final rule. The first draft of
the (off mike) program that the committee saw was dated January
of 1995, which is two and one half years ago. Do you have any
comments as to why it has taken so long to get this directive
close to closure, since the substantive portions of the, of
evidence don't seem to have changed much.
CAPT TRUMP: Basically, I think it's an issue of
we, like other parts of government, are a bureaucracy and it
takes time to get things staffed through, to try to reach
consensus on what sometimes can be contentious issues. And for
this one is really opening up new areas, new requirements for
medical support, medical surveillance, which have not been
recognized as being important at this detail. And then it
takes some time to get through that. It also takes some time
for the actual staffing and I think I can reiterate the FDA as,
you know, there's more work than we have people to do the
things that we have to do.
DR. CASSELLS: Is it fair to say that there was no
contingent relative to the need, the contingent was over the
how to carry it out?
CAPT TRUMP: Yes, I think that's, you know, it's
the how, the details that go into what medical people in the
field are going to be required to do and the issue is one of
every time you add on a requirement, it either means the
individual is out there, the medical folks, you know, whether
they're in the field in Bosnia, whether they're on a ship or,
you know, trying to get more things accomplished and they're
not given extra hours in the day necessarily to do that and --
DR. CASSELLS: Let's move a little further along on
that, then. The committee had some nice things to say about
the briefings that we had received and the proposed medical
surveillance program, in our interim as well as our final
report. You've been quite straightforward today in your
testimony about the shortcomings in the Bosnia operation
relative to the implementation of the beginnings of that
medical surveillance program. And one of the things you stated
was how important it is that operational doctrine as well as
training doctrine incorporate medical surveillance activity
into the day-to-day operations. How confident are you that in
future conflicts this can in fact happen? Another way of
asking that same question is, how automatic can you make these
procedures? That they're not the first thing over the side?
CAPT TRUMP: Right. I think that's the challenge.
I think one of the key points in there is that we have to
integrate it into our data management systems, that we're not
collecting, doing things with paper and pencil that sort of has
to make its way back in an envelope in a soldier's or sailor's
hand to the medical record in the states, that it's electronic,
it's collected in the field, it goes electronically to a
central point that somehow ties it all together so we have an
electronic medical record, an electronic record that documents
everything that happens to an individual during their medical --
during their military career.
DR. CASSELLS: Let's follow that a little bit longer,
madam chairman, if I may.
DR. LASHOF: Sure, go right ahead.
DR. CASSELLS: What plan, once this directive is in
place, what plans does the department have to make sure that
this integration into operational thinking takes place? And I
mean thinking as opposed to writing the directive.
CAPT TRUMP: I think that it's a matter of steps.
One is to have the departmental directives and instructions in
place. The other step that I had mentioned there was making
this part of joint doctrine and also making the requirement one
of joint plan so that when there is an operation the script
basically is already written for what needs to be done. Once
those things are there though that, that also in turn will
drive what the requirements are for the people necessary to do
the job. That daily should feed back into the training
pipeline so that people who are being prepared as corpsmen,
medics, doctors, to go with units on deployments know that
there is a requirement to do medical surveillance, that there
is a requirement to do pre- and post-deployment health
assessments. It won't be an overnight evolution or success. I
mean, it really is a matter of making this a requirement for
the whole system and not just an add on that's done. And I
think --
DR. CASSELLS: The background to my -- the background
to my question and the reason for my concern in my experience
with making malaria prophylaxis a command responsibility in
Vietnam and how unsuccessful that was overall in achieving its
goal. But on the matter of a more practical basis of
integrating medical databases that you, you've heard at various
points as many as 125 different medical databases need to be,
in some way, incorporated and made to communicate with each
other. Do you really think that's feasible and what kind of
time line can that be done over and has anybody given any
thought to designing a system from the ground up?
CAPT TRUMP: I'm not the expert to answer those
questions.
DR. LARSON: Could I follow up a little bit on
that? There are three things in you testimony that I find
confusing, related to structurally how this is going to be set
up to make sure it doesn't fall through the cracks. First you
talk of it as joint preventive medicine policy group which
apparently is a fairly new group and as I read it, their role
is to develop this business plan with the deliverables and so
forth. Then one of the deliverables is the -- that the
analysis function for the medical surveillance will be housed
in the Army Center for Health Promotion and Preventive
Medicine. Then farther down, you talk about this health
preparedness working group which is talked about in the future
tense as another group whose job it is to, "... ensure support
of the highest levels for our medical surveillance efforts."
It sounds to me that there are several new groups being formed
and the concern, of course, is are they going to talk to each
other? What are their various roles? And you didn't even
mention those when answering that question.
CAPT TRUMP: I think those are some issues to be
resolved. They represent, I think, different levels of
coordination on the, you know, the health preparedness working
group is a much higher level organ -- body that --
DR. LARSON: Is it already in existence? Or is it,
it's in the future tense here.
CAPT TRUMP: I know that the principals have met.
Whether it's in existence -- but then that's only been in the
last week or so. With some of the others, it's a matter of
developing the connections of -- when we make a single service,
in this case the Army, responsible for deployment surveillance.
It does require tying in data from a variety of different
services, identifying what the staffing should be to support
that which really should be done on a tri-service with
representatives of the different services participating in that
effort.
DR. LARSON: But what's the evidence that that
group can handle this surveillance analysis function. In fact,
the data that we have isn't even from the DOD, it's from the
GAO. I mean, I'm just trying to figure out how all this is
going to work.
CAPT TRUMP: Okay. I had mentioned the one report
they had done on hospitalizations in Bosnia and I brought two
copies of that along if you'd like to take a look at it. I
mean, their efforts out there to look at hospital -- you know,
this deployment-related medical information to tie in as many
different databases that are possible to support that
surveillance effort. It really is, I think -- they have the
capability to do it. It's a matter of getting our different
systems to support them.
MAJ CROSS: Is that the surveillance -- the idea
is to take a look at the data and to spot trends of potential
diseases or potential disasters, is that what you're saying?
And who, who does the analyzing? Who can spot the trends? Is
it somebody in-theater or is it somebody here in the United
States?
CAPT TRUMP: It's different levels. The system
really needs to be set up so that it's usable for the people
who are in-theater and they really, during this deployment,
have been able to use it to, you know, monitor their trends.
It's also a responsibility for the medical staff for the
commander-in-chief in that region to monitor that. And they,
you know, they have used it. We actually had this type of
surveillance in place to some degree during the Gulf War as far
as being able to look for how a real disease outbreaks and
respond early. And this is not necessarily looking for the
long -- some of this in-theater is not looking for the long-term result,
it's looking for problems now in the early stage
so you can intervene, you know, move the troops from the
hazard, provide the protective measures, change the procedures
or the food source or whatever it is as early as possible. I
think that's something that has been done. There's always a
responsibility of preventive medicine and medical people in a
military operation. What we're doing now is hopefully setting
up a system that will not only do that but then preserve that
data for the long term and then also taking on a new
responsibility of some long-term monitoring for, potentially
for any long-term health effects that might be associated with
the deployment.
DR. LASHOF: I think -- okay. We'll get --
MAJ CROSS: Is the VA tied into any of these
committees? Because the thought is, in terms of long-term,
once a person comes back and is discharged, just in the
civilian community. At some point, something shows up a couple
years down the road, obviously reports into the VA system. So
I don't know, are they tied in today to this program?
CAPT TRUMP: A lot of what I was telling you, it
has not been -- that is, you know, that's an issue with both
departments though as far as making this a sort of a seamless
transition from information that DOD has that relates to the
health of veterans to information that the VA will have access
to, and especially in the response to the presidential review
directive, I think that is a concern there. It's not just
DOD's issue or problem.
MR. KOWALOK: Okay. A quick question about the
working group, the health preparedness working group. As far
as making medical surveillance part of our doctoral thinking is
that working group with a policy setting group? Or encouraging
such element?
CAPT TRUMP: That group is just established. I
mean, just identified and I --
MR. KOWALOK: Will there be a representation for the
operational side, the house?
CAPT TRUMP: The co-chair there is the medical
director from the Joint Staff. I mean, he represents the
operating force.
MR. KOWALOK: And that's relevant to commanders in
the field?
CAPT TRUMP: Right.
DR. LASHOF: Any other questions for Trump?
FLOOR: Yes.
DR. LASHOF: Okay. Let me just set policy. Let me
explain the policy here. I recognize you've had your hand up
but our policy is that the time for open presentation from the
public is the first thing in the morning. After that, it's an
opportunity for the committee to relate and ask questions just
on the staff, to the agencies or whoever we ask to testify.
It's not a time for people in the audience to ask further
questions or interrogate the people asking questions. However
-- let me finish -- if you have specific questions for the
committee, at the break you can speak to any one of us. If you
further statements you want to make that you want to submit for
the record we're happy to take them but we can not open up just
time and everything else, in fairness we can not open up the
floor to any member of the audience to enter into an
interchange with the people who are here to testify. I'm
sorry. That's been our policy for a year and a half and we
have to keep to it.
FLOOR: (Off mike)
DR. LASHOF: I think --
FLOOR: (Off mike)
DR. LASHOF: Well, I, I'm --
FLOOR: (Off mike)
DR. LASHOF: Right. He's talking to us about --
FLOOR: (Off mike)
DR. LASHOF: I'm sorry. This is not an opportunity
we can give you at this time. I would ask you to pass
statements to us, you can put it in writing to us, you can meet
with us at the breaks but we just can not open up. This is a
general forum. Okay.
I think we'd like to move to ask Gen Parker some
follow-up questions that came up this morning in relation to
the investigation on drugs and VA and specifically with what's
happening in Bosnia.
DR. CASSELLS: Gen Parker, one of the things that FDA
in the testimony this morning, as well as the GAO report,
identified as a problem with the clinical trials of tick-borne
encephalitis vaccine in Bosnia, was the absence of operational
doctoral acceptance into the program of necessary requirements
for conducting a field trial in a deployed environment. And
there were a number of deficiencies that were identified in the
letter that FDA sent to Dr. Martin at the end of July of this
year. What is the department, and particularly since the Army
has the IND for this, how does the Army intend to address the
deficiencies that were identified in that letter? And first,
is that clinical trial still in process?
GEN PARKER: Sir, let me start with the last first.
The TB encephalitis program stopped on the first of -- it will
stop completely on the first of September. There are no
vaccinations going on in Bosnia at the present time and the
closure of the program will occur on the first. Immunization
stopped a long time ago. It takes a little while to get the
paper and close the program. If I could take a moment and just
go through my testimony with you, I will answer a lot of your
questions. I'm trying to be quite frank, Dr. Lashof and
honorable members of the committee, with this Department of
Defense problem that we have. As you know, I'm the assistant
surgeon general for the Army and I will discuss the letter from
Dr. Friedman to Dr. Martin from our perspective in the DOD.
DR. NISHIMI: If you could limit it just to the TBE
portion Gen Parker and I think that would be most useful.
GEN PARKER: Okay. With respect to the
investigational vaccine for protection against tick-borne
encephalitis in Bosnia, we have investigated and we are
continuing to investigate the facts concerning the issues that
I will address below here. We will share our findings with the
Food and Drug Administration that's mandated within ninety days
as requested by Dr. Friedman and we will also share those
findings with you and the entire committee.
In consultation with both the Food and Drug
Administration and this committee we will take appropriate
corrective policy and operational actions regarding identified
problems with planning, the execution and the leadership in
this effort. We reviewed a report on the same issue from the
General Accounting Office that was dated May 13, 1997, and have
already concurred with its findings. There are several key
areas where we agree that major improvements are needed and
where particular attention is needed to ensure that regulatory
requirements are met in a field situation.
First, we will ensure full accountability and
recording of all doses of vaccine whether they are actually
used or destroyed if they become unusable during a field
storage situation. One of the findings was that the number of
doses shipped minus the number of doses given didn't add up and
there was no accountability for those doses of vaccine that
were either destroyed or just not given.
Second, we will ensure that all volunteers fully meet
the approved eligibility criteria and that we have documented
their informed consent in their permanent medical record. This
is a slight deviation from a standard IND protocol that you
would do at a medical center in the civilian world. Those
consent forms generally go into a file in the program
director's office who's running the protocol and they don't
really end up in a person's medical file. We will put it in
their medical record.
Third, we will ensure that commanders at all levels -- and this
speaks to Mr. Cassells' question very distinctly --
we will ensure that commanders at all levels, both medical and
line, commit in advance -- and that's a key term, commit in
advance, that's the key to this whole thing. If it's not front
loaded it doesn't work. We've learned that. We see it time
and time again. We need to commit in advance the necessary
time, the mission priority and the human and material resources
to ensure the successful conduct of such studies so that we
meet regulatory standards. From the senior leadership of the
Department of Defense to every subordinate level of command,
when we commit to conducting the evaluation of an
investigational medical product, we will ensure that all
responsible commanders identify and execute the responsibility
as a matter of emphasis.
Fourth, we will ensure that all informational
materials, counseling and forms are approved by the
institutional review board responsible for the oversight of
this particular protocol.
Finally, we will resource such studies with fully
qualified clinical investigation teams on-site with the
necessary authority and responsibility to conduct, monitor,
report and correct potential problems as the work proceeds, to
set in an oversight group, a committee that has not been formed
yet but the surgeon general of the Army will co-chair a group
with the assistant secretary of defense for health affairs.
The committee will include flag representatives from each of
the services both medical and operational. Appropriate legal
and ethical experts, key members of other government agencies,
for example the FDA and other civilian experts.
We and the FDA are ready to engage in a productive
dialogue to correct these transgressions that we have committed
in, not only with the follow-up on Pyridostigmine Bromide which
is a little different than the TB encephalitis program.
They're two different -- one is apples and one oranges but we
didn't do well with either one.
MAJ KNOX: I still am concerned Gen Parker. I think
that all soldiers would agree that if there's some type of
vaccine that's available to help us that we're all willing to
take it, and I think that was what was important, and it came
out at Desert Storm for those troops who were going to Bosnia
that we could learn from that lesson. However, we obviously
have not learned from that lesson. We still are not doing
things correctly and we still have deficiencies. Why would
this be -- this third chance be any different than the second
chance?
GEN PARKER: Well, I'm not here to make an excuse.
The facts are on the table; we did not do it well. Now, why
didn't we do it well? I think it goes back to one of these
things that for a long time the military services have expected
a lot from the medical departments and considered that if the
medical department was going to take care of it, it wasn't
necessarily one of those things a CINC or a task force
commander had to put in an operational order. And we are
gradually getting to the point, when I said in my testimony
that we want the command and the line involved, medical is not
an ancillary thing when you go into an operation. It has to be
in the ops order big and brilliant so that every commander from
the top to the bottom is checking and re-checking on how that
piece of the op order is being executed.
So, I think this is really getting at why we are
getting a little better and a little better and a little better
but we're not there yet. This is a major effort to have people
take a look at more than just the situational operational order
to maintain peace, to take a piece of land or something like
this. War is complicated. It is much different than World War
II or Korea. I think we have many, many more things on our
plates for our commanders. It's a complex task and we're still
learning how to execute a very, very complex task.
MAJ KNOX: Well unfortunately though, I mean, there
may be a presidential advisory committee that has to look now
at soldiers who served in Bosnia that agreed to take tick-borne
encephalitis vaccine. Sometime we have to learn from our
mistake and pay for it and it just is very disappointing, I
guess.
CAPT PARKER: Well, I think one of the things that
came out of the tick-borne encephalitis look, that we've
already done, was that you know when you're in a medical center
and you sit on an investigational review board and that
protocol director comes up and presents the protocol, presents
the consent forms and everything, it is scrutinized to the --
MAJ KNOX: Right.
GEN PARKER: -- to the punctuation. When you go
into a field situation and a junior physician or a junior
health care provider has trickle down affect of what this is
all about and only hears that he's got to educate a commander
and the troops of his unit about this vaccine and either give
it or not give it according to what the soldiers or airmen or
sailor says after the education thing and makes a small slip in
the presentation that this is good for you, breaks all of the
investigational protocol that we're all very used to. And this
is in the excitement of trying to do a job. And so therefore,
anybody that was in that room when that health care provider
said to that group take this, this is good for you, just did
not get good informed consent.
MAJ KNOX: Well, right there might just be evidence as
to why we can't have informed consent during wartime.
GEN PARKER: Well, I think we can. I think we can.
We have grappled with very tough problems in the past and I
think through our officer basic courses and our officer
advanced courses we can tailor the education that when you're a
military physician or a military health care provider, it is
much different than if you were working at the city hospital
downtown and this is why, and here's all the things that you
have to be concerned with. I think we can do that.
DR. CASSELLS: My question really was --
DR. NISHIMI: Okay. I have -- a question. Gen
Parker, I mean, obviously the committee and veterans have good
reason to be concerned by the content and the scope of the
FDA's letter of deficiency to DOD and I don't think I need to
point out to you the obvious but I'll repeat it for everyone
here is, that this president has also been particularly
concerned about ethical conduct of research involving human
subjects. That's what his apology to the Tuskeegee survivors
was about. That's what the Human Radiation Experimentation
Committee was about. That's what the National Bio-ethics
Advisory Commission is about. That's what elements of this
body's charge is about. And so you've heard a lot of
statements that perhaps DOD is incapable of conducting and
overseeing research involving soldiers during deployments. It
strikes me that someone needs to give this serious independent
scrutiny on how DOD is conducting this kind of research and
would you support a sort of full and open inquiry and review of
DOD's research involving human subjects on military personnel
by the president's Bio-ethics Commission?
GEN PARKER: I would welcome that. I have no
objection to that and I think it was said in this room this
morning that there are many investigational new drugs that are
being used in our medical centers and throughout our medical
system and the FDA feels that the compliance with the -- the
regulatory compliance with that is extremely good and we have a
very good track record at actually getting new drugs approved
and on the market.
Now, if I could take a minute, the consideration that
Pyridostigmine Bromide and Bot Tox was an investigational drug
when we went into Southwest Asia is true. Now, the reason is
was investigational was both of those items were being used for
things that the label did not say that it could be used for.
And so therefore, it became investigational not because it was
a new drug but it was an old drug being used for new purposes.
And the FDA and the DOD wrestled with that because that became
a forced projection -- forced protection issue.
What we did with the follow-up on PB and Bot Tox
could be shuffled off the table a little bit by saying well,
the war was a very fast war, big buildup, fast war and a fast
cleanup. We can't say that for Bosnia. We went into this
protocol just a little differently and the protocols are
totally different. The PB and the Bot Tox need to be separated
from the TBE protocol. I mean, there was a protocol that was
not followed in peacetime and I put those in two different
categories. So I would -- I welcome any outside help.
The emphasis for the Department of Defense is we will
have major threats in the future for our forces. We need to
protect them. We will probably be using investigational new
drugs or new drugs in the future and we've got to get over this
ethical difficult hurdle.
DR. LASHOF: I think that's an important point and
as I was discussing with FDA this morning, I think it's very
difficult for you to carry out a true clinical trial under
wartime conditions. I mean, we have enough trouble trying to
do them in civilian conditions and we've had major clinical
trials where some -- any doc -- just wants their patient in
this group and not in the placebo and maneuvers that way. And
so we know there are lots of problems and I think the real
challenge will be, is there a way we can identify what drugs we
need to use in the field and if contingency approval for them
rather than having them be investigational drugs and think we
can carry out experiments in the field when we're sure that the
benefits outweigh the risks. But it's how that in advance.
But the idea of a Presidential Commission on Bio-ethics looking
at this or some others looking at it in more
depth, it clearly will come up in the response to the notice of
proposed rule making all those issues ought to be aired. And
so, you know, we're not going to put this one to bed very
easily but it's something we need to resolve, hopefully before
the next conflict, although I'd much rather just have us not
have any more conflicts.
Are there any more questions? Orlando, did you have
any? Time? Thank you very much, appreciate your appearance
here and thank you Gen Parker for sharing that insights with us
too.
GEN PARKER: Thank you, ma'am.